energies
Review
Review of Positive and Negative Impacts of Electric
Vehicles Charging on Electric Power Systems
Morsy Nour 1,2,*, José Pablo Chaves-Ávila 1
, Gaber Magdy 2
and Álvaro Sánchez-Miralles 1
1
Institute for Research in Technology (IIT), ICAI School of Engineering, Comillas Pontiﬁcal University,
28015 Madrid, Spain; jose.chaves@iit.comillas.edu (J.P.C.-Á.); alvaro.sanchez@iit.comillas.edu (Á.S.-M.)
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, Faculty of Energy Engineering, Aswan University,
Aswan 81528, Egypt; gabermagdy@aswu.edu.eg
*
Correspondence: morsy.mohammed@iit.comillas.edu
Received: 23 July 2020; Accepted: 4 September 2020; Published: 8 September 2020


Abstract: There is a continuous and fast increase in electric vehicles (EVs) adoption in many countries
due to the reduction of EVs prices, governments’ incentives and subsidies on EVs, the need for energy
independence, and environmental issues. It is expected that EVs will dominate the private cars
market in the coming years. These EVs charge their batteries from the power grid and may cause
severe eﬀects if not managed properly. On the other hand, they can provide many beneﬁts to the
power grid and get revenues for EV owners if managed properly. The main contribution of the article
is to provide a review of potential negative impacts of EVs charging on electric power systems mainly
due to uncontrolled charging and how through controlled charging and discharging those impacts
can be reduced and become even positive impacts. The impacts of uncontrolled EVs charging on
the increase of peak demand, voltage deviation from the acceptable limits, phase unbalance due
to the single-phase chargers, harmonics distortion, overloading of the power system equipment,
and increase of power losses are presented. Furthermore, a review of the positive impacts of controlled
EVs charging and discharging, and the electrical services that it can provide like frequency regulation,
voltage regulation and reactive power compensation, congestion management, and improving power
quality are presented. Moreover, a few promising research topics that need more investigation in
future research are brieﬂy discussed. Furthermore, the concepts and general background of EVs,
EVs market, EV charging technology, the charging methods are presented.
Keywords: electric vehicles; uncontrolled charging; delayed charging; controlled charging; V2G; V2B;
V2H; peak shaving; valley ﬁlling; congestion management; renewable energy sources
1. Introduction
Greenhouse gases (GHGs) emissions, global warming, and climate change are getting signiﬁcant
attention worldwide [1]. Countries aim to diminish the use of fossil fuel which is the main reason
behind these issues. Most of fossil fuel consumption is in electricity generation and transportation
sectors [2].
In 2014, 35% of the total energy consumption was by the transportation sector [3].
Electricity generation can cut fossil fuel usage by moving to renewable energy sources (RESs) instead
of traditional nonrenewable generation and transportation sector can cut fossil fuel usage by moving to
electriﬁed transportation. With this transformation in the transportation sector, carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions can be reduced [4,5]. The advancement in EV technology can lower the reliance on fossil
fuels and leads to emission reduction [5]. Charging the EVs from a power grid with high share of RESs
generation contributes more to decreasing pollutant emissions [6].
Energies 2020, 13, 4675; doi:10.3390/en13184675
www.mdpi.com/journal/energies
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
2 of 34
Electriﬁed transportation like metros, electric trains, trolleybuses, trams, etc., are widely used in
many countries public transportation and is considered a mature technology, but private electriﬁed
transportation like private EVs have not had large adoption in the past due to limitations in battery
technology in terms of heavy weight, high price, short life, and long charging duration. Due to the
breakthroughs and recent developments in battery technology, EVs are proposed as a competitor to
traditional vehicles driven by gasoline due to the fast decline of EV prices [7]. Moreover, EVs produce
no pollution (locally) and have a very high energy conversion eﬃciency compared to traditional
vehicles because the internal combustion engine (ICE) is less eﬃcient than the electric motor (EM).
Furthermore, several countries already initiated governmental programs to increase EVs market share
by ﬁnancial subsidies and tax exemptions to motivate people to buy EVs. Additionally, many car
manufacturers produce various types of EVs that have diﬀerent speciﬁcations and prices. This gives
the buyer a lot of options to choose from depending on his budget and car usage (i.e., long distance or
short distance).
These EVs can be charged from large charging stations, street chargers, workplace chargers,
and private home chargers [8], which will be supplied from the distribution network. It is expected
that this new load which draws a large amount of electric energy from the power system in a short
time will have harmful eﬀects on the distribution network if not managed optimally and will foster
the need for large infrastructure upgrades, which are an economic burden for utility companies.
Therefore, comprehensive studies should be executed to understand and assess the characteristics of
EVs load and probable eﬀects they may have on the electric power system, especially the distribution
networks [9], and consider this new load in the design, operation, and planning processes. Additionally,
techniques to minimize and alleviate these negative eﬀects and for optimal integration of EVs into the
power grid should be developed [10].
A large number of research studies have investigated and assessed the impacts of uncontrolled
EV charging on distribution networks due to uncertainties related to these studies. Many uncertainties
should be considered like charging start time, the charger power rating, the charging location,
EVs battery capacity, EVs battery state of charge (SoC) [11] when started charging, penetration level,
and distribution network status. The studies assessed the impacts of uncontrolled EVs charging on
distribution networks total power demand [12], transformer loading and life [13], cable loading [14],
voltage proﬁle [15], power losses [16], voltage and current unbalance [17], and harmonics distortion [18].
Moreover, various studies proposed solutions for optimal integration of EVs by delayed charging,
smart charging, vehicle to grid (V2G) technology, vehicle to building (V2B) technology, and vehicle
to home (V2H) technology, and how it can provide electrical services like frequency regulation,
voltage regulation and reactive power compensation, peak shaving and valley ﬁlling, integration of
RESs, spinning reserves, and improving power quality [19,20].
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a general background of EVs, EVs market,
EVs types, the beneﬁts and challenges of EVs, and EV charging technology. Section 3 presents
the charging and discharging methods; for instance, uncontrolled charging, delayed charging,
controlled charging, V2G technology, V2B technology, and V2H technology. Section 4 presents
the negative impacts of uncontrolled EVs charging on electric power systems. Section 5 presents the
positive impacts of controlled charging and discharging of EVs on electric power systems. Section 6
presents a few promising research topics that need more investigation in future research. Finally,
conclusions are presented in Section 7.
2. Electric Vehicles Technology
An EV is a vehicle that is powered or driven, at least in part by electricity such as trams, metros,
electric cars, electric trains, trolleybuses, etc. Most of the mentioned technologies are mature and
widely used, except the private EVs (i.e., electric cars), but they are getting huge attention in the last
years. EV technology is not new as it appeared in the 19th century powered by lead–acid batteries and
it was not used a lot because the fuel-powered cars, i.e., internal combustion engine vehicles (ICEVs),
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
3 of 34
showed better performance at that time because the energy density of fuel was better than lead–acid
batteries. Usually, EV terminology is widely used to refer to private electric cars and not to other
electriﬁed transportation methods like trams, metros, etc.
2.1. Electric Vehicles Market
Based on the 2019 global EV outlook report of the International Energy Agency (IEA) [7], there is
a very rapid growth of EVs market. The report shows that the EVs stock crossed 3 million in 2017
and exceeded 5 million in 2018. China represents the largest EVs market, then Europe and the United
States after that. Norway achieved the highest deployment of EVs with a market share of 46% followed
by Iceland 17% and Sweden 8%. It is expected that the number of EVs will increase signiﬁcantly
in the coming years. The forecasts for EVs number at 2030 between 130 and 250 million. There are
many EVs in the market now from several manufacturers (BMW, Chevrolet, Ford, Hyundai, Kia,
Mercedes-Benz, Mitsubishi, Nissan, Tesla, Renault, Volkswagen, etc.) with diﬀerent speciﬁcations
(battery technology, battery capacity, electric motor power, electric range, and onboard charger power
rating,) which gives a wide range of options for people interested in buying an EV. Although the fast
increase in the EV market, it still represents a small percentage of the global passenger light-duty
vehicles market currently. This means that EVs have a long way until they become capable of making
a signiﬁcance in GHGs emissions and oil demands.
It should be mentioned that large scale adoption of EVs will have economic impacts and they
should be viewed from two points of view, the EV owners’ point of view and the power grid point of
view [21]. From the power grid point of view, a high-power load represented in EVs will be introduced,
which means additional expenses in fuel and generation capacity [22]. The grid power losses will rise,
although they can be reduced by the use of controlled charging approaches [23]. Several studies showed
that the electric power system will have a signiﬁcant power loss due to EVs charging with diﬀerent
penetration levels. The lifespan of transformers and cables in the distribution grid may decrease due
to excessive uncontrolled charging. A study in [24] showed that controlled charging of EVs results in
reducing the peak demand and 60% saving in the system cost. Therefore, the improvement in EVs
charging infrastructure and charging strategies need attention to enhance the power grid economic
aspects. From EV owners’ point of view, various beneﬁts can be achieved like reducing the operating
costs due to lower electricity prices compared with fuel and higher eﬃciency of EMs used in EVs
compared with ICEs used in ICEVs [25]. On the other hand, the high initial cost of EVs due to the
expensive batteries used compared with ICEVs represents a considerable challenge. Mass production
of EVs, advancement in battery technology, new charging infrastructure and smart charging strategies,
and providing rewards and incentives to EVs owners may control the high initial cost of EVs [26–28].
2.2. Types of Electric Vehicles
There are many types of EVs categorized according to the energy converter (i.e., ICE or EM)
used to propel the vehicle, the power source (i.e., battery, fuel cell, or gasoline), and if it charges from
an external source (i.e., charging station or home charger) [4]. A brief explanation of those types is
presented in the following subsections. The basic structure of diﬀerent EVs types is shown in Figure 1.
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
4 of 34
 
Figure 1. Basic structure of diﬀerent electric vehicles (EVs) types. (a) Hybrid Electric Vehicle (HEV);
(b) Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle (PHEV); (c) Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV); and (d) Fuel Cell Electric
Vehicle (FCEV).
2.2.1. Hybrid Electric Vehicle (HEV)
HEV is similar to ICEV but with oversized EM and battery. The battery can be charged by
regenerative braking and by the ICE at light loads. Usually, battery and EM drive the vehicle at
lower speeds and the ICE drives the vehicle at higher speeds. Furthermore, EM can assist the ICE
at high load and enhance vehicle performance and eﬃciency. HEV has lower GHGs emissions and
fuel consumption than ICEVs. In this type, no charging from distribution network by EV charger is
used [29,30]. Therefore, it does not result any negative impacts on the power system due to battery
charging and cannot provide any electrical services. There are diﬀerent structures of this type [29]:
series, parallel, series/parallel, mild, and complex HEVs, in addition to series/parallel plug-in hybrid
electric vehicle (PHEV) which is explained in the next subsection. The basic conﬁguration for parallel
HEV is shown in Figure 1a.
2.2.2. Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle (PHEV)
This is a HEV, but its battery can be charged by regenerative braking, by ICE, and EV charger
supplied from distribution network as well. It is characterized by larger EM power, smaller ICE,
and larger battery capacity compared with HEV in order to extend the electric range. It can operate
in all-electric mode and use EM only which results in zero GHGs emissions. The capacity of the
battery speciﬁes the range of electric operation [29,30]. This type usually has a small battery capacity.
Therefore, it is expected that it has a limited negative impact on electric power system. Moreover,
its ability to provide electrical services is limited. PHEV can be in any hybrid conﬁguration. The basic
conﬁguration for parallel PHEV is shown in Figure 1b.
2.2.3. Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV)
BEV is expected to dominate the EVs market with future advancements in battery technology
and price reduction. BEV contains only EM which is powered by a battery and does not contain ICE.
The electric driving range depends on battery capacity. The main advantage of this type is that it
produces no emissions locally, which is very crucial in big cities. There are many conﬁgurations of
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
5 of 34
this type [29] depending on diﬀerent companies’ designs but the basic conﬁguration and principal
components are shown in Figure 1c. The battery is charged from the distribution network by diﬀerent
kinds of EV chargers. Moreover, during deceleration and braking of EV the motor operates as a
generator and produces electric energy that charges the battery. This is called regenerative braking
which is used in other public electriﬁed transportation like metros and trams too. To enable regenerative
braking bidirectional DC/AC converter is used. It allows electric energy to ﬂow from battery to AC
motor in the driving mode and from the AC motor to the battery in braking mode [29,30]. The main
challenge for BEV is the long charging period and limitation of public charging infrastructure. This issue
will be tackled in the near future with the advancement in battery technology which will extend the
electric range that the EV can drive before the need to be recharged. Furthermore, the large-scale
deployment of public fast charging stations will reduce EV owners range anxiety. Moreover, in the
future, BEV manufacturers may enable battery swapping. This means replacing the empty battery
with a fully charged one in battery swapping station which needs a very short time. More details
about battery swapping are given in Section 2.4.3. This type of EVs has the largest battery capacity
and its charging can result in a severe negative impact on the power system if not managed properly.
Additionally, its ability to provide electrical services is higher than other EV types.
2.2.4. Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle (FCEV)
FCEV is powered by EM like BEV, but it uses a fuel cell instead of a battery. The vehicle is
refueled with hydrogen and the fuel cell converts hydrogen gas chemical energy to electric energy
which powers EV motor. Hydrogen can be produced from fossil fuels like natural gas or water
electrolysis. FCEV has short refueling time like ICEVs [29,30]. The basic conﬁguration of FCEV is
shown in Figure 1d. It can also work with a combination of battery and supercapacitors. If no battery
is used, this vehicle type will have no impact on the power system because it does not need electric
charging from distribution system.
2.3. Beneﬁts and Challenges of Electric Vehicles
It is essential to introduce the advantages and disadvantages of conventional vehicles which
are dominant in the market now.
Table 1 shows the advantages and disadvantages of ICEVs.
The disadvantages of ICEVs might be a big problem in the future of the transportation sector.
This was the reason to look for some alternatives. EVs appeared as a promising solution to some of
these disadvantages.
Table 1. Advantages and disadvantages of internal combustion engine vehicles (ICEVs).
Advantages
Disadvantages
Long range
Low eﬃciency (15 to 35%)
Fast refueling
No regenerative braking
Low cost per unit of power
Pollution due to exhaust gases
Noise
EVs show many beneﬁts compared with ICEVs but few challenges must be faced to increase EVs
adoption. Table 2 shows both the beneﬁts and challenges of EVs [29,31]. Because both traditional
vehicles and EVs have their strengths and weaknesses, hybrid vehicles (i.e., HEVs and PHEVs) with
several conﬁgurations appeared, which try to combine the strengths of both types and avoid weaknesses.
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
6 of 34
Table 2. Beneﬁts and challenges of EVs.
Beneﬁts
Challenges
Emissions are localized at power stations and not in cities
which improves citizens’ health
Limited electric range
High eﬃciency because of high electric motor eﬃciency
Limited number of charging stations and long charging
(refueling) time
Low (for PHEV) or no emissions (for BEV)
Negative impacts on the power grid if uncontrolled charging
is used
Fuel or energy independence from countries which
produce fuel
Consumer acceptance
Simple transmission, fewer moving parts and low maintenance
High prices
Less noise pollution
Battery low energy density
Provide electrical services to the power system and helps the
RESs integration.
Expensive battery and needs replacement after few years
2.4. Electric Vehicles Charging Technologies
EVs charging can be classiﬁed into three main technologies: conductive charging, wireless
(i.e., contactless) charging (WC), and battery swapping. Conductive charging is the simplest and the
currently used charging method. For conductive charging, there is physical contact (i.e., cable) between
the power supply and battery but for WC there is no physical contact. WC and battery swapping
are not widely used like conductive charging and still under study and development. The following
subsections will provide more details about these technologies. Figure 2 presents classiﬁcation of
diﬀerent charging technologies.
 
Figure 2. Classiﬁcation of EVs charging technologies.
2.4.1. Conductive Charging
EV battery chargers have a signiﬁcant responsibility in the advancement of EVs because the
EVs adoption and social acceptance depends on the eﬀortless access to charging stations or street
chargers. Several topologies were presented for single phase and three phase EV chargers [32,33].
It consists of AC/DC converter, power factor correction elements, and DC/DC converter as shown
in Figure 3. Charger systems are classiﬁed to on-board (i.e., inside vehicle for slow charging) and
oﬀ-board (i.e., outside vehicle for fast charging). Moreover, they can be classiﬁed to unidirectional or
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
7 of 34
bidirectional chargers [34]. Unidirectional charging has simple charging hardware and allows power
ﬂow from grid to EV only. Bidirectional charging allows power ﬂow from the grid to EV and can inject
power from the EV battery to the grid, building, or home.
Figure 3. Onboard EV charger components.
Availability and advancement of EV charging infrastructure can decrease the required onboard
energy storage and decrease the range anxiety of EV owners. According to the Society of Automotive
Engineers (SAE) Standard J1772 [35], there are three charging levels. Most of the EV owners are
expected to charge at home overnight according to the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) so
Level 1 and Level 2 chargers will be the primary option [36], while level 3 will be used for commercial
charging stations.
•
Level 1 Charging
This is the slowest charging way and the simplest because no additional infrastructure is needed,
and any wall outlet can be used. In the US, a standard 120 V/15 A wall outlet is used for Level 1. It is
available only as an on-board charger. Although its cost is less than other charging levels, the EV needs
a long time to be fully charged. Due to its low power rating, this charging level has the lowest impacts
on distribution systems.
•
Level 2 Charging
Level 2 charging uses 208 V or 240 V at currents up to 80 A, and 19.2 kW charging power.
EV owners prefer Level 2 compared with Level 1 because of its shorter charging time. It may need
dedicated electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) installation for public or home charging. Some EVs
like Nissan Leaf have an on-board charger of this charging level.
•
Level 3 Charging
Level 3 is for fast charging and it operates as a commercial refueling station (i.e., less than 1-h
charging time) similar to the conventional gas station which can be installed at city main roads and
highways. It is supplied from a three phase circuit with 480V or higher voltages. It is available only
as an oﬀ-board charger because the charging power is high and may exceed 100 kW. It is clear that
level 3 charging is not suitable for home charging. It has a high installation cost, and this represents
a potential issue. It is expected that public chargers will use Level 2 or Level 3 for fast charging in
shopping centers, parking lots, restaurants, hotels, theaters, etc. High charging power represents an
advantage from charging time point of view, but it may generate a peak demand and overload the
distribution network equipment in addition high installation cost.
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
8 of 34
2.4.2. Wireless Charging (WC)
WC enables EVs charging without physical contact or cable between the power supply and
battery. Advancement of WC will reduce the required onboard battery capacity which will decrease
EVs price and mass, which will result in reduction of EVs energy consumption. WC may become a
future alternative for traditional conductive charging. WC has a potential to be used for charging
electric bus batteries [37]. It can operate at diﬀerent voltages (level 1, 2, and 3). The highest eﬃciency
recorded for WC is 90% [38]. There are three main technologies of WCS: inductive, resonant inductive,
and capacitive WC [39,40].
Inductive wireless charging (IWC) will be explained to provide the basic idea of this technology.
The IWC contains AC/DC converter that converts AC power supplied from electricity grid to DC.
Then, it is converted again to AC power with high frequency fed to transmitting (i.e., primary) coil.
All these components are in the street underground. The EV contains receiving (i.e., secondary) coil
that receives power from transmitting coil by electromagnetic induction through the air gap. Then the
AC power is converted to DC by AC/DC converter and charge the battery [41]. A simpliﬁed diagram
of IWC that explains the main concept is shown in Figure 4. IWC can be classiﬁed into static inductive
charging and dynamic inductive charging. For static inductive charging, EV must be stationary during
charging. However, dynamic inductive charging allows WC while EV is moving [42].
Figure 4. A simpliﬁed diagram of inductive charging.
Current WC is designed for unidirectional power ﬂow from grid to vehicle, but future development
of this technology is to enable EVs to discharge power to the grid wirelessly to provide electrical
services. The advantages of this technology are electrical safety, no cables needed, and user convenience.
The challenges of this technology are the high infrastructure cost compared to conductive charging,
and low power transfer eﬃciency between coils [40].
2.4.3. Battery Swapping
Battery swapping station (BSS) is a charging station at which the empty EV battery will be
replaced by a fully charged battery in few minutes [43]. Battery swapping may be used with electric
buses that have a high capacity battery which will take a long time to be charged by traditional
conductive charging. This technology requires a large stock of batteries owned by the BSS or a third
party and rented to EV owner. BSS contains a distribution transformer, AC/DC converters to charge
the batteries, batteries, and battery swapping equipment [44,45]. Some studies considered that BSS
can use bidirectional chargers to provide electrical services by V2G mode [46,47]. The challenges of
this technology are battery standardization, high infrastructure cost, and large space for BSS. In 2013,
Tesla company revealed a battery swapping system that can swap the battery in 90 s [48].
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
9 of 34
3. Charging and Discharging Methods
Charging methods can be classiﬁed into two main categories, unidirectional and bidirectional
charging. In unidirectional charging the energy ﬂow is only from the grid to EV (i.e., uncontrolled
charging, delayed charging, and controlled charging). In bidirectional charging, energy can ﬂow from
the grid to EV and from EV to the grid or loads as buildings, or homes (i.e., V2G, V2B, and V2H).
Figure 5 presents the classiﬁcation of diﬀerent charging and discharging methods. Figure 6 shows
how the total power demand proﬁle of distribution system will change with diﬀerent EV charging or
discharging methods [10].
 
Figure 5. Classiﬁcation of diﬀerent charging and discharging methods.
Figure 6. Total power demand proﬁle with diﬀerent charging and discharging methods. (a) Uncontrolled
charging; (b) Delayed Charging; (c) Controlled Charging; and (d) V2G, V2B, and V2H.
3.1. Uncontrolled Charging
This is the simplest method to charge EVs and the current used way. The EV is plugged in for
charging at the maximum power rating of EV charger until the EV battery is fully charged (i.e., state
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
10 of 34
of charge (SoC) is 100%), similar to any electric device with a battery (i.e., laptop, smart phone, etc.).
Several studies concluded that uncontrolled charging of EVs may result in severe negative impacts on
distribution networks such as increase in peak load demand, overloading of transformers and cables
and shorten their life, increase voltage drop, increase system unbalance due to single phase chargers,
increase power losses, and increase harmonic distortion [49,50]. Moreover, this type of charging limits
the EVs acceptable penetration level, because EV owners charge their vehicles when arriving home
from work, which usually coincides with peak hours as shown in Figure 6a. The ﬁgure shows the
total power demand of residential consumers during the day [51] before connecting EVs (in grey) and
how the total power demand will change when EVs are connected to the distribution network for
charging. Furthermore, it will accelerate the need for infrastructure upgrade. This charging method is
also known as dumb charging, uncoordinated charging, and unregulated charging.
3.2. Delayed Charging
The severe impacts of uncontrolled charging can be alleviated with the use of delayed charging.
In this case, the utility has diﬀerent electricity prices during the day with low price at oﬀpeak time
(i.e., time utility wants EV owners to charge at) and high price at peak time (i.e., time utility does not
want EV owners to charge at). This method controls the charging time and not the charging power
(i.e., EV charge at charger maximum power rating). With the optimal design of electricity tariﬀprices
during the day, it can work as an incentive for EV owners to charge their vehicles on low price times
which maximize both utility (i.e., distribution system operator (DSO) or distribution company) and EV
owners beneﬁt and result in valley ﬁlling as shown in Figure 6b. Although this method is a very simple
technique to ﬂatten the load proﬁle and shift the load to oﬀpeak time, non-optimal design of electricity
price, can incentivize a large number of EV owners to charge at oﬀpeak times, which may result in a
second peak especially at the beginning of oﬀpeak time. Moreover, this method ignores EV owners’
preferences and needs to charge their EVs at diﬀerent times during the day. This charging method is
also known as oﬀpeak charging, and indirect controlled charging with time of use pricing [52,53].
3.3. Controlled Charging
Although delayed charging has less impacts on distribution networks than uncontrolled charging,
it has limitations. These limitations can be surpassed using controlled charging. This method controls
the charging time and charging power of EV depending on some distribution network parameters
like total power demand, transformer loading, voltage stability, power losses, etc., or to minimize the
charging cost. In this technique, EV acts as a controllable load. Various studies proposed controlled
charging algorithms for maximizing EV owner beneﬁt by charging cost reduction and maximize utility
beneﬁt by distribution network stress and losses reduction, enhancement of power quality, and shifting
the EV load to oﬀpeak hours which result in valley ﬁlling [54,55] as shown in Figure 6c. This charging
method is also known as coordinated charging and smart charging.
Controlled charging can be classiﬁed as centralized, decentralized, and autonomous control
architecture [56]. In centralized control, a central controller collects data such as electricity prices,
system loading condition, EVs status, and owner preferences; based on this data the controller
determines the set points of controlled EVs. Although centralized charging control usually results
in optimal use of the system and enables EVs to participate in many electrical services, it has few
disadvantages. There are privacy issues because all users data can be accessed by the central controller,
the need for expensive two way communication infrastructure, large data amount must be processed,
which is a high computational burden, any problem in the central controller or loss of communication
can lead to severe consequences, and a large number of messages should be communicated in a short
period which can result in communication issues. Moreover, most of the utility companies do not use
real time pricing, which makes this method inapplicable currently [56].
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
11 of 34
In decentralized charging control, the control entity (i.e., DSO or aggregator) sends signals to
EVs like electricity prices to incentivize them to take a speciﬁc action such as reducing their charging
power or stop charging at peak hours. In this case no need to send EVs private information to the
control entity. Although decentralized control methods need a cheaper processing and communication
infrastructure compared with centralized control methods, they have few disadvantages. The optimal
utilization of the system is not ensured, their ability to participate in ancillary service markets is limited
and they are vulnerable to variations in customers behavior [56].
In autonomous charging control, the charging power is regulated based on local inputs such
as voltage and battery SoC without any communication between EVs and control entity [57,58].
Usually, autonomous charging control is classiﬁed as decentralized control with no communication.
Although this control architecture is the single option for distribution systems with no communication
facilities and it can enable the integration of a larger number of EVs to the power grid in its current status,
it has few disadvantages. Their ability to participate in ancillary service markets is limited, they are
vulnerable to variations in customers behavior and the system cannot be operated optimally [56].
3.4. Vehicle to Grid (V2G)
This refers to the capability of EVs to supply power to the distribution network and operate as
distributed energy storage devices. Bidirectional EV chargers are used to enable the electric power to
ﬂow in both directions from grid to vehicle (i.e., charging) and from vehicle to grid (i.e., discharging).
When there is surplus electric energy (oﬀ-peak times) EVs will charge, which is called grid to vehicle
(G2V) mode, and when there is a deﬁcit in electric energy and consumption is higher than generation,
EVs will supply power to the distribution network and this enhances the system reliability and
eﬃciency [59]. So EVs can be seen by utilities as load and source. Because EV power and energy
are limited and approximately have no eﬀect on the power system, usually an aggregator is the
responsible for aggregating EVs power or energy, which are located in geographical area to participate
in electrical services.
The interaction in this case is between EV and power system management organization like
DSO, which has to operate the power system in a reliable way. V2G can provide many grid services
such as frequency regulation, spinning reserve, enabling the integration of more RESs, and peak load
shaving and valley ﬁlling [60] as shown in Figure 6d. Other beneﬁts of V2G is generating revenues for
EV owners, and decrease emission and operating cost if grid services were provided by traditional
nonrenewable generation [60]. Although this is a very promising technology regarding providing
electrical services to the power system, it has many challenges and barriers. This technology is very
complex and needs many infrastructure changes because it needs bidirectional chargers and continuous
two-way communication between EVs and system operator or aggregator. Moreover, it is expected that
continuous charge and discharge of EV battery may lead to battery degradation and shortening its life.
In contrast, new studies concluded that EV can participate in V2G without battery degradation [61].
3.5. Vehicle to Building (V2B)
V2B is similar to V2G but in V2B there is no communication between the vehicle and the grid,
and it only communicates with the building so the energy stored in the EV battery can be used to
supply the building loads only. The use of V2B mode can be very eﬀective during peak load times and
outage conditions. EVs are used as an energy storage device and operates in two modes: G2V and
V2B. It operates in a G2V mode to charge the battery at low cost when the grid is lightly loaded and
there is surplus electric power generation. It operates in a V2B mode to supply the building loads
when the electricity price is high at peak hours [62]. By doing this V2B is providing peak shaving
and valley ﬁlling which is utility beneﬁt and reduce building expenses by discharge at periods with
high electricity prices and reduce building demand from the grid. This method is simpler than V2G
as it operates behind the building meter, but it provides less electrical services to the power system.
V2B involves one building (i.e., many homes) and many EVs.
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
12 of 34
3.6. Vehicle to Home (V2H)
This is very similar to V2B but in this case, only one home is involved and not a whole building
as in V2B and only one EV. Normally EV absorbs power from home and can supply power to home
when needed. It needs a simple architecture compared to V2G and V2B and can provide less electrical
services to the power system compared to them. It can ﬂatten the house daily load proﬁle and reduce
house consumption during peak hours with high electricity prices. Local energy production from
photovoltaic (PV) or small wind generation can be eﬀectively used by storing the excess generation in
EV battery and use it when needed [63,64].
4. Negative Impacts of Electric Vehicles on Electric Power Systems
Uncontrolled charging of EVs with high penetration levels is expected to introduce unwanted
negative impacts on the power system. The possible negative impacts are the impact due to increase of
peak demand, voltage deviation from the acceptable limits, phase unbalance due to the single-phase
chargers, harmonics injection, overloading of the power system equipment, and increase of power
system power losses [65]. A large number of studies have investigated these impacts because the
estimation of EVs charging impacts is based on several conditions [65] and have many uncertainties
that must be considered and modeled properly in the study to accurately estimate the impact of EVs
charging on the power systems, the main key variables are [66,67]:
•
EV battery charger
Depending on the charging infrastructure and the EV model single phase or three phase chargers
may be used for charging. Moreover, there are many power ratings for EVs chargers operating at
diﬀerent voltage levels. So, the fast chargers are expected to increase the peak demand in a larger value
compared with slow chargers.
•
Time
The time of connecting the EVs for charging is not certain so it is unknown how many EVs
may be charging at the same time and the probability that the EV charging time interferes with the
peak demand time of the distribution networks. Some studies assume the charging start time of EVs,
and other studies make surveys in a geographical area or a city to know the home arriving time of
vehicles and model it as probability distribution.
•
Location
The place at which an EV charge is random. EV owner may charge at home, friend’s home,
street charger, or charging station. It may be diﬀerent from distribution network to another where are
the charging locations and what are the EV charger type (i.e., private or commercial chargers).
•
Battery capacity
There are a wide range of EV batteries capacity. PHEV usually contains a small battery capacity
while BEV contains higher battery capacity. EVs with high battery capacity will draw a larger amount
of energy from the power grid.
•
Battery SoC
The battery SoC at the plug-in instant is stochastic. Many studies assume the SoC and others
consider it as a probability distribution.
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
13 of 34
•
Penetration level
EVs still have a very small market share which will increase quickly for few countries like Norway
and slowly for many other countries. Therefore, many studies considered diﬀerent EVs penetration
levels ranging from 10% to 100%.
•
Distribution system status
There are many diﬀerences between distribution systems in terms of structure (i.e., radial or
ring), equipment loading condition before connecting EVs, voltage level (i.e., medium voltage or low
voltage), voltage proﬁle, daily load proﬁle of loads, etc.
Therefore, numerous studies were executed to assess the impacts of EVs charging on the power
system. Most of the studies focus on the distribution network at which EVs charging occurs, because the
most severe impacts are expected to occur at the distribution level. Classiﬁcation of positive and
negative impacts of EVs charging/discharging on electric power system can be seen in Figure 7 and
they are explained in the following sections.
 
Figure 7. Classiﬁcation of EVs charging impacts on electric power systems.
4.1. Impacts Due to Increase in Peak Demand
Various studies have been performed for assessment of EVs charging impact on the peak demand
and load proﬁle on distribution systems. Many distribution networks in diﬀerent countries and with
diﬀerent topologies and characteristics were chosen to conduct these studies. In [68], the peak demand
increased by 53% when uncontrolled EVs charging was used with 30% penetration level. In another
study [69], with only 10% penetration level of uncontrolled EVs charging in residential network,
the peak demand increased signiﬁcantly. In [70], the eﬀect of charging light duty vehicles up to 100%
penetration level on system peak demand was investigated. For 100% penetration level, uncontrolled
charging resulted in a high increase in peak demand, which must be minimized by delayed charging.
In [71], it was found that EV rapid charging at peak hours will result in a signiﬁcant rise in peak
demand and equipment limits were exceeded even with very small penetration levels. However, by the
use of slow charging at oﬀpeak hours, distribution network could integrate up to 50% penetration
level without violating equipment limits.
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
14 of 34
In [72], the impact of uncontrolled charging of EVs on total power demand for three distribution
networks (i.e., urban, suburban, and rural) with diﬀerent capacities were evaluated. The study
considered penetration levels up to 25%. For the highest penetration level, the peak demand increased
by 9% for both urban and rural networks and 11% for suburban network. This increase made the rural
network exceed the maximum capacity limit while urban and suburban did not exceed the capacity
limit. In [73], it was found that uncontrolled charging increased the peak demand. The study proposed
a demand response method to control EVs demand and other ﬂexible home devices. This method
enabled the integration of EVs without increase in peak demand from the base case (i.e., without EVs).
In a recent study [74], the impacts of uncontrolled EVs charging on Great Britain power system
was investigated. The study also considered how controlled charging can mitigate these impacts. For a
100% penetration level, it was found that the peak demand will increase by 8 GW at generation and
transmission level. Moreover, the results showed that controlled charging can signiﬁcantly reduce the
increase in peak demand and eliminate the need for new generation infrastructure. At the distribution
level 100% penetration level will require 28% upgrades at distribution network. Controlled charging
can reduce the distribution network upgrade requirements to only 9%. Another interesting conclusion
in this study is that load proﬁle at distribution level and load proﬁle at transmission level cannot be
ﬂattened at the same time using controlled charging. For instance, ﬂattening the load at transmission
level (i.e., national demand) will require 19% upgrades at the distribution level. Moreover, ﬂattening the
load at distribution level will result in 6 GW increase in national demand.
In [75,76], it was concluded that the increase in peak demand can be crucially mitigated by the
use of optimized charging and time of use (ToU) charging. A study on the Estonian grid [77] with
30% penetration level of the passenger’ cars available was conducted and the results showed an
increase in the peak load with 5% for uncontrolled charging and 4% increase for controlled charging.
Section 5.3 gives more details on how controlled charging can ﬂatten the load proﬁle and how controlled
charging/discharging can cut the peak demand (i.e., peak shaving).
From the previous studies, it is clear that large integration of EVs charging in uncontrolled manner
may lead to a signiﬁcant increase in peak demand. This increase in peak demand will result in higher
operation costs because expensive generation must be operated at peak hours for short duration to
supply peak load. In addition, infrastructure upgrade is required if the peak demand is higher than
components capacity at generation, transmission, or distribution levels. Moreover, the use of delayed
charging and controlled charging is eﬀective in minimizing peak demand increase due to EVs demand
and the accompanied negative impacts; this can enable higher EVs penetration.
4.2. Voltage Instability and Phase Unbalance
Voltage instability represents a challenging issue and can result in system disruptions [78].
The reason for that is the operation at high load demand and near the stability limit. The grid voltage
stability is crucially aﬀected by the characteristics of the load. EVs load characteristics are diﬀerent
from the conventional loads (i.e., residential, industrial, and commercial) characteristics and the earlier
estimation of its power and energy demands are diﬃcult. In addition, the EVs consume more power in
a short time to fully charge the battery. Furthermore, single phase EVs chargers may increase phase
unbalance at distribution network. Phase unbalance results in unwanted negative eﬀects at distribution
network operation and connected loads and should remain in the acceptable limits.
Numerous studies have been executed to evaluate the impacts of EVs charging on voltage
instability, voltage deviation, and phase unbalance. In [79], the voltage stability was investigated in a
study implemented in the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 43 bus distribution
system. The results showed that voltage stability of distribution network is highly reduced by EVs fast
charging. The impact of uncontrolled charging on voltage deviation at diﬀerent daily durations was
assessed in [80]. Obtained results showed a large increase in voltage deviation which was close to
exceeding the acceptable limits especially if EVs were charging at peak period. The study proposed
stochastic programming strategies to minimize voltage deviation. In [72], the impact of uncontrolled
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
15 of 34
charging of EVs on voltage drop for three distribution networks (i.e., urban, suburban, and rural) was
estimated. The study considered penetration levels up to 25%. For rural network which has long
feeders, higher voltage drop was recorded due to EVs charging which fosters the need for voltage
regulation devices. The impact of uncontrolled charging of EVs on voltage deviation in primary and
secondary distribution systems was examined in [81]. The study considered diﬀerent penetration levels
(i.e., 30% and 50%), diﬀerent EVs types (i.e., BEV and PHEV), and diﬀerent charging levels (i.e., level 1
and level 2). Results showed no voltage limits violation at any node of primary distribution system.
However, voltage limits violations were recorded in the secondary system. Moreover, it showed that
BEV caused more voltage drop than PHEV due to its higher battery capacity and level 2 charging
caused more voltage drop than level 1. In another work [82], the eﬀect of large-scale integration
of EVs with high power charging in IEEE 39 bus distribution system and how the distribution
network reliability was improved by optimal charging of EVs was investigated. Another method for
reducing the voltage instability was proposed in [83]; the method is based on voltage control by the
tap-changing transformer.
In [84], the impact on voltage unbalance due to uneven EVs distribution on the three phases was
investigated. The study considered two scenarios for EVs distribution on phases. For scenario A,
50% of EVs are connected to phase a, 30% to phase b, and 20% to phase c. For scenario B, 80% of EVs
were connected to phase a, 20% to phase b, and 0% to phase c. For scenario A, the voltage unbalance
factor (VUF) did not violate the limits until 50% penetration level. However, for scenario B, the VUF
reached the limits at 25% penetration level. Another study [85] investigated the impact of single phase
EVs charging (i.e., G2V) and discharging (i.e., V2G) on voltage unbalance of low voltage distribution
network. The study considered many cases and results showed that in some cases VUF exceeded the
limit for both charging and discharging modes. In [86] a signiﬁcant phase unbalance occurs due to
the EVs charging with single phase chargers at level 1 at the residential network which results from
the unequal distribution of EVs chargers in the three phases. However, a small impact on voltage
and current unbalance was observed due to EVs charging in [87]. It should be mentioned that by
using controlled charging and discharging of EVs with considering VUF minimization, the voltage
unbalance at distribution network can be minimized. More details are provided in Section 5.4.
Previous studies showed that usually low EVs penetration levels can have a small impact on
voltage values even if uncontrolled charging was used. However, high EVs penetration levels can
cause high voltage drop, and voltage value may exceed the acceptable limits especially at the end
of long feeders (i.e., rural network), which will require the installation of voltage regulation devices.
Studies showed that secondary distribution networks have a higher probability of exceeding voltage
limits than primary distribution networks. Moreover, phase unbalance represents a challenging issue
since most EVs are expected to be charged by single phase private chargers. Very small EVs penetration
levels can cause small phase unbalance. However, high EVs penetration levels and high uneven
distribution of chargers on the three phases may result in VUF higher than acceptable limits.
4.3. Harmonics Distortion
Power quality problems may arise due to EVs charging. Because power electronic devices
are used in EV chargers, so high EVs integration can aﬀect the power network’s power quality.
Harmonics injected by EV chargers into the power grid will lead to negative eﬀects on electric power
system components which are designed to be supplied by pure sinusoidal waveform and increase
system losses. Few studies found that EV chargers had a non-signiﬁcant eﬀect on harmonic distortion.
For instance, in [88], a comprehensive harmonic study was implemented using the Monte Carlo method
and the results showed a minor impact of harmonics in the distribution network. Another study [89],
found that commercial EV chargers resulted in a small increase in the total harmonic distortion of
voltage (THDv), and it was less than 0.8%.
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
16 of 34
In contrast, many studies concluded that EVs charging had a large impact on the distribution
system. In [90], the THDv increased to 11.4% due to uncontrolled rapid charging and this value
exceeded the limit of 8% based on EN 50,160 standard and a solution to the harmonic problem was
proposed by using the control of PV inverter as an active ﬁlter. In [91], the impact of EVs charging with
slow and fast charger on total harmonic distortion (THD) was assessed for diﬀerent EVs models. A high
total harmonic distortion of current (THDi) was recorded for fast charging between 12% to 24%. In [92],
the impact of traditional EV charger on the quality of system voltage and drawn current was evaluated.
Traditional charger caused very high THD. The authors proposed a smart charger that draws sinusoidal
current and has a unity power factor. The smart charger signiﬁcantly reduced THD compared with
traditional charger. The negative eﬀects of EV home chargers on distribution network power quality
and transformer life were studied in [93]. The study found a quadratic relation between THDi and
life consumption of the transformer. Moreover, the study concluded that THDi should not be more
than 25 to 30% to have acceptable increase in life consumption of the transformer. In [94], the impact
of EV chargers’ current harmonics on distribution system capacity was studied. Results showed
that the 10 kV cable was overloaded at 27.25% penetration level when current harmonics due to
EV chargers was considered. However, the cable was overloaded at 30.74% penetration level when
current harmonics due to EV chargers was neglected. For harmonics reduction from EVs integration,
ﬁlters must be added to the EV chargers.
Only a few studies found that EV chargers harmonics result in a minor impact in the distribution
network. Most of the studies showed that traditional EV chargers can cause unacceptable harmonics
values. These high harmonics will result in decreasing the life cycle of distribution network components
(i.e., transformers and cables). However, by proper design of EV charger circuits, control strategy,
and ﬁlters integrated into the charger circuit, the charger harmonics can be alleviated signiﬁcantly.
More details can be found in Section 5.4.
4.4. Overloading of Distribution Network Components
The high EVs energy demand requires a large amount of electric energy to be transmitted from
the generation stations to the distribution networks. The distribution networks’ equipment such as
transformers and cables may get overloaded due to the new EVs load and this will lead to stress these
components and reduce their lifespan and foster the need for infrastructure upgrade. Several researches
were executed to analyze the impacts of EVs charging on distribution system components. In [95],
the distribution transformer aging due to uncontrolled charging of EVs with level 1 and 2 charging
power was investigated. The results showed that level 2 charging has a higher aging impact on the
transformer in comparison with level 1 charging. The impacts of EVs charging on transformer and
underground cable were assessed in [96] for low and high penetration levels (i.e., 12.5% and 70%).
The transformer and cable were overloaded in both penetration levels. The impact of uncontrolled
charging of EVs on distribution transformers with 25 kVA and 50 kVA power rating was examined
in [81]. The study considered diﬀerent penetration levels (i.e., 30% and 50%), diﬀerent EVs types
(i.e., BEV and PHEV), and diﬀerent charging levels (i.e., level 1 and level 2). Results showed that
50% penetration level resulted in overloading 50% of the 25 kVA transformers and 35% of the 50 kVA
transformers. Furthermore, BEV with level 2 charging caused 10% increase in the number of overloaded
transformers compared with PHEV with level 1 charging.
In [72], the impact of uncontrolled charging of EVs on the loading of secondary transformers
installed in three distribution networks (i.e., urban, suburban, and rural) with diﬀerent capacities
was executed. The study considered penetration levels up to 25%. The study counted the number of
transformers overloaded above 20%. EVs charging resulted in increasing the number of transformers
overloaded above 20% for suburban area, while urban and rural areas did not have high overloading
percentages. The impact of uncontrolled charging on distribution networks transformers and cables
was investigated in [97]. Results showed a large increase in the number of overloaded transformers
and cables. The number of overloaded transformers and cables decreased by 25% and 8%, respectively,
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
17 of 34
when controlled charging was used. In [98], it was found that the presence of EVs will lead to reducing
life duration of distribution transformer. In [99], it was concluded that the uncontrolled charging of
EVs will lead to aging of 25 kVA distribution transformer. Moreover, it was found that transformer
aging can be reduced using controlled charging strategies.
Another study [100], concluded that uncontrolled level 1 EVs charging has insigniﬁcant impact
on transformer life but the massive penetration of EVs may have a severe eﬀect on transformer
lifespan.
The transformer lifespan can be enhanced by using oﬀ-peak EV charging and load
management [95,100,101]. In [102] the cable loading was examined for EVs peak charging hours.
The results demonstrate that the cable can handle up to 25% penetration level for slow charging and
up to 15% penetration level for fast charging and cannot handle massive EVs penetration easily.
The high energy demand of EVs will increase the loading at diﬀerent parts of the power system
(i.e., generation, transmission, and distribution). Distribution level is highly aﬀected by EVs charging
compared to transmission and generation levels, and most of the studies focused on the impacts of EVs
charging on distribution network components. The studies showed that the acceptable EVs penetration
level before overloading of network components varies depending on the network components’
capacity and their loading condition before connecting EVs. Studies concluded that the uncontrolled
charging of EVs result in overloading of many transformers and cables at the distribution network and
can result in reducing their lifespan and requires components upgrade which represents economical
challenge to electric utilities. Results showed that many distribution networks can only allow 10%
penetration level before overloading if level 2 charging was used. The network can handle higher
penetration levels if level 1 slow charging was used. Using proper charging and discharging methods
(i.e., delayed charging, controlled charging, V2G, V2B, and V2H), distribution networks can integrate
higher EVs penetration levels before they reach their capacity limits. More details can be found in
Section 5.3.
4.5. Increase in Power Losses
Extra power demand represented in EVs charging will lead to higher currents ﬂowing and extra
power losses in diﬀerent system components, such as generators, transformers, and cables, which is
the main concern for utilities. Various studies were performed to examine the EVs charging impact on
system losses. In [103], the impact of uncontrolled charging of EVs on two large scale distribution
system was executed under three penetration levels (i.e., 35%, 51%, and 62%). Uncontrolled charging
resulted in a large increase in energy losses and required investment cost. Losses and investment costs
reduced when delayed charging or controlled charging were used. The impact of uncontrolled charging
on power losses at diﬀerent daily durations was assessed in [80]. Obtained results showed a large
increase in power losses especially if EVs were charging at peak period. The study proposed stochastic
programming strategies to minimize power losses. In [104], a study examined the EV charging impact
on a Danish distribution network. The obtained results showed that for uncontrolled charging with
50% penetration level the grid losses increased by 40% and increased only 10% for controlled charging.
In [105], the impact of EVs charging on distribution transformer power losses was investigated.
It was found that for penetration levels ranging from 2% to 40%, the transformer losses increased to more
than 300% mainly due to windings copper losses increase. The increase in power losses at the IEEE 33
bus distribution system due to EVs fast charging station was evaluated in [106]. The study investigated
many cases by changing the charging station bus and the charging station power consumption. It was
found that installing charging stations at weak buses (i.e., far from the main transformer) increased
system power losses. Moreover, the power losses could be reduced by distributing charging station
load at two buses instead of one bus. In [107], the increase in energy losses of a distribution network
due to EVs charging was examined. The distribution network supplies residential and commercial
loads and located on a Korean island. The results showed that daily energy losses increased by 66% for
40% penetration level.
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
18 of 34
Previous studies focused on assessing the impact of uncontrolled EVs charging on the power
losses at distribution networks. The studies concluded that uncontrolled EVs charging resulted in a
high increase in distribution network power losses. Using proper charging and discharging methods
(i.e., delayed charging, controlled charging, V2G, V2B, and V2H), power losses due to EVs charging
can be reduced signiﬁcantly. Additionally, the installation of distributed generation (DG) near the
charging location can decrease the energy supplied from the grid, and hence reduce the power losses.
5. Positive Impacts of Electric Vehicles on Electric Power Systems
EVs are parked for most of the daytime [108], and they are connected to the charger for a longer
duration than required recharging duration. Therefore, EV battery can be used to provide grid services
and gain revenues for EV owners by injecting power to the grid to keep demand–supply balance or by
controlling the charging time and power to reduce the charging cost and electricity bill. Many studies
showed that controlled EVs charging can improve power system eﬃciency, reduce operation cost,
and minimize RESs curtailment. Moreover, EVs controlled discharging can provide additional beneﬁts
and electrical services [109]. EVs can provide short time scale electrical services due to the fast
response of battery chargers such as primary frequency control (PFC), medium time scale electrical
services, such as secondary frequency control and long time scale electrical services, such as congestion
management and minimization of power losses due to the high battery capacity [110]. The focus in
reviewing the literature will be in operational aspects and services provided by EVs and not in the
optimization algorithms and control methods used due to the broad spectrum of approaches used in
these studies [111].
5.1. Frequency Regulation
Power system frequency should be maintained at nominal value (i.e., 50 or 60 Hz) for normal
operation. It is considered an important indicator of active power supply–demand balance. In normal
operation, the power imbalance occurs due to continuous load variation or ﬂuctuation of RESs
generation that depend on weather conditions. In emergency conditions, the power imbalance occurs
due to sudden outages of loads, transmission lines, or generating units. Failing to maintain frequency
in the speciﬁed limits will result in load shedding in case of under frequency or disconnection of
generating units in case of over frequency. In traditional power system, frequency regulation is achieved
by synchronous generators in large power plants (e.g., hydro and thermal power plants) [112]. In future
power systems, controllable loads like heat pumps and EVs will have a signiﬁcant role in frequency
control [113]. EV batteries have a faster response compared to traditional generation units due to the
fast response of EV power electronic interface (i.e., EV charger). Therefore, controlled charging and
discharging of EVs can be an eﬀective option for frequency regulation. Moreover, frequency regulation
is becoming more challenging due to the reduction of system inertia and increase of ﬂuctuation due to
the increasing share of RESs with power electronic interface [114–116].
The ability of available commercial EVs (i.e., Nissan Leaf) to provide PFC by only changing the
charging power and with no V2G capability was tested experimentally in [117]. A small isolated
power system with renewable generation was used as a test system. The results proved the technical
feasibility of EVs to provide PFC with fast response time. In [118], the authors studied how EVs can
participate in PFC in two ways. The ﬁrst is to switch oﬀEVs charging and the second way is to inject
power to the grid in V2G mode. Another study [119] proposed a control method to provide PFC in
three area power system by coordinating EVs charging and discharging while minimizing battery
degradation cost. The eﬀectiveness of EVs to provide primary frequency regulation was tested in [120]
for a small isolated power system containing wind turbines, diesel generators, and hydro generators.
The study veriﬁed that EVs were very eﬀective in reducing frequency oscillation with a small change
of EVs consumed energy and negligible variation of the required charging time. It also showed that
EVs can enable more wind energy share while keeping normal operation.
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
19 of 34
In [121], the authors studied two modes of EVs charging control for frequency regulation while
considering EV owner diving behavior. The ﬁrst mode only controls the charging power and the
second mode controls charging and discharging power. Results showed that EVs were eﬀective in
reducing frequency ﬂuctuation. A coordinated control strategy between EV operating in V2G mode
and traditional generation for load frequency control (LFC) was proposed in [122]. The proposed
control strategy was tested on the Great Britain power system. The results showed the eﬀectiveness of
the proposed strategy in improving frequency regulation and reduction of power mismatch. Moreover,
due to EV participation, the traditional power generation output variations were reduced. The EVs
ability to participate in LFC in a microgrid operating in isolated mode was investigated in [123].
The microgrid contains both renewable and nonrenewable generation. The studies proved that EVs
can enhance frequency stability in addition to reducing emissions from nonrenewable generation and
increase microgrid operator proﬁt. In [124], EVs operating at V2G mode were used to provide LFC in a
multi-area power system containing traditional nonrenewable generation (i.e., thermal, hydro, and gas
turbines).
Previous studies results proved the feasibility of using EVs to provide frequency regulation due to
its fast response. Results showed that the use of EVs can achieve rapid control action in balancing the
generated power and the power demand during load and source variations and the system frequency
perturbation controlled by EVs is much lower than the other generation units. EVs can provide frequency
control either by regulating charging power with no V2G capability or by regulating charging and
discharging power (i.e., V2G capability). In the ﬁrst approach, frequency regulation can be achieved
by only change the EVs charging power. This approach is simple, requires simple infrastructure,
and have a limited eﬀect on battery degradation. In the second approach, frequency regulation is
provided by controlling both charging and discharging power. This approach is more eﬀective than
the ﬁrst approach. However, this approach is more complex, requires infrastructure upgrade (i.e.,
ICT and bidirectional chargers), and aﬀect battery life cycle due to continuous charging and discharging.
The studies showed that EVs are eﬀective in providing frequency regulation at traditional power
systems containing only nonrenewable generation. It resulted in reducing frequency ﬂuctuation and
reducing the variation of generation units output power. Furthermore, it is eﬀective when there
is a renewable generation installed in traditional power systems. It can reduce ﬂuctuations due to
intermittent renewable generation, enable the integration of more renewable generation, and reduce
curtailment of renewable generation production. Moreover, EVs proved their eﬀectiveness in providing
frequency regulation in microgrids with a high share of renewable generation. It can reduce frequency
ﬂuctuation, increase microgrid proﬁt, reduce curtailment from renewable generation, and enable
integrating high share of intermittent renewable generation while operating in acceptable limits.
5.2. Voltage Regulation and Reactive Power Compensation
The voltage at any point of the power system must be maintained within acceptable limits.
Voltage is an indicator of the loading status of distribution system. Voltage is high if the network is
lightly loaded and low if the network is highly loaded. Although the common problem in distribution
system is exceeding the lower limit, excessive DG may cause voltage rise and exceeding the voltage
upper limit. Keeping the voltage within normal values at distribution level, which usually has a
radial structure, is a challenge especially for long feeders and may require voltage regulation devices.
Violation of these limits will result in improper operation or damage to the connected loads and
may lead to voltage instability. Voltage control can be achieved by active or reactive power control.
Active power can be controlled by DGs, energy storage technologies, and controllable devices like
EVs and heat pumps. Likewise, reactive power can be controlled by transformers on-load tap changer
(OLTC), capacitors, and static var compensators.
Many researchers studied voltage regulation by EVs active power control. An online controlled
charging method was tested in [125].
The objective was to maximize EV owners satisfaction
while considering distribution network limits.
The algorithm minimized voltage deviation,
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
20 of 34
transformer loading, and power losses. In [126], a decentralized/autonomous controlled charging
method was proposed. It regulates the charging power based on the local voltage and battery SoC.
It charges at a high charging power if the voltage is normal and decrease the charging power or stop
charging if the voltage is low. EVs with low SoC have a charging priority. The proposed method
reduced the voltage drop and improved the voltage proﬁle compared to uncontrolled charging. In [127],
an optimization algorithm was developed to provide peak shaving and valley ﬁlling in addition to
improving voltage proﬁle by controlling the charging and discharging of EVs. In [128], a controlled
EVs charging technique was used to solve the voltage rise issue resulted from excessive PV generation
at distribution system.
Another option for EVs based voltage regulation is by using capacitors in the DC link of the EV
bidirectional chargers to supply reactive power. EV charger can do this even if the EV is not connected
for charging. The ability of level 1 EV bidirectional charger to provide reactive power support was
tested in [129]. The study showed that the DC link capacitor can provide reactive power support
with no eﬀect on battery degradation. In [130] a direct voltage control method was used to enable EV
charger at DC fast charging station to inject reactive power to the grid to regulate bus voltage and
reduce system power losses. In [131], a strategy for voltage regulation at distribution network was
proposed. It is based on the coordination of DG, OLTC, and EVs providing reactive power support
by operating at V2G mode. The proposed algorithm was eﬀective in voltage regulation, minimizing
OLTC operation times, and reduce the active power curtailment of DG. A limited number of studies
investigated the use of EV chargers for reactive power compensation, which makes it a promising
research area to be investigated in future research studies.
From studies results, it can be concluded that uncontrolled charging of EVs can result in a higher
voltage drop at distribution networks and voltage values exceeding the acceptable limits, especially in
long feeders, and will require infrastructure upgrade by installing voltage regulation devices. However,
using controlled charging and discharging methods the voltage at all parts of the distribution network
can be kept within acceptable limits and daily voltage proﬁle can be improved without voltage
regulation devices. Moreover, studies showed that the EV charger DC link capacitor is eﬀective in
providing reactive power support and voltage regulation.
5.3. Congestion Management
Load demand varies during the day and usually have peak hours in the evening. During peak
hours expensive generators should be turned on for few hours for supply–demand balance.
Uncontrolled charging of EVs will result in enlarging the peak power demand, which results in
operating expensive power generation in addition to transmission and distribution networks stress.
If the installed generation capacity is less than the required demand at peak period, new power plants
must be constructed. This issue can be eliminated or alleviated by using delayed charging, controlled
charging, V2G, V2B, and V2H. Using delayed charging and controlled charging can shift EV charging
to oﬀpeak hours, which results in valley ﬁlling as shown in Figure 6b,c. Using V2G, V2B, and V2H
technology enables injecting power to the grid, building, or home at peak hours which results in peak
shaving and charge at oﬀpeak hours which results in valley ﬁlling as shown in Figure 6d. The process
of peak shaving and valley ﬁlling is called load ﬂattening or load leveling, which means reducing the
diﬀerence between the maximum demand and the minimum demand during the day. By doing this
congestion at the power system can be handled (i.e., congestion management).
Delayed charging was proposed in [132], and compared to uncontrolled charging. The results
indicated that delayed charging is eﬀective in reducing the stress of distribution system components,
reducing voltage drop and power losses compared to uncontrolled charging.
A decentralized
controlled charging method for valley ﬁlling was proposed in [133]. This method needs simple
unidirectional communication between the system operator and EV to broadcast day-ahead electricity
prices. Based on the price, EV can autonomously control the charging behavior and charge at oﬀpeak
period to reduce charging costs. This resulted in valley ﬁlling and reduction in generation cost by
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
21 of 34
28% compared to uncontrolled charging. The impact of uncontrolled EVs charging on total power
demand was investigated in [134]. Results showed that uncontrolled charging will increase peak
demand. Delayed charging and controlled charging were proposed for alleviating the impact of
uncontrolled charging. The results showed that the proposed methods were very eﬃcient in shifting
the EVs charging from peak period and postponing any network upgrade.
Another study showed that the German transmission system cannot handle large scale uncontrolled
EV charging even with future expansion plans [135]. It also showed that V2G technology is eﬀective
in reducing transmission system congestion and enhance grid stability. The eﬀectiveness of V2G in
providing peak shaving and valley ﬁlling was proved in [136]. By allowing some of the EVs to inject
power back to the grid at peak period resulted in reducing the original peak demand (i.e., peak shaving).
By allowing EVs to charge at oﬀpeak period only resulted in valley ﬁlling. In [137], the integration
of EVs in a weak isolated grid in a Spanish island was studied. The study proposed a strategy for
coordinated charging and discharging of EVs. Results proved the eﬀectiveness of EVs in the eﬃcient
management of the grid, in addition to ﬁlling the valley and shaving the peak demand.
In [138], V2B was used in a building-integrated microgrid which contains EVs, battery storage,
and PV. The objective was to reduce the peak load, which will decrease subscribed power rating
and reducing the building electricity bill. The study showed that V2B can enable peak load shaving.
By encouraging more buildings to have a similar management system it can reduce the peak load
demand in the distribution system or even the whole grid. The eﬀectiveness of V2H in reducing home
peak demand was tested in [64]. Results showed that V2H was very eﬀective in minimizing home
peak demand and home electricity bills.
Previous studies’ results showed that uncontrolled charging of EVs will result in an increase of
peak demand at diﬀerent levels of the power system (i.e., generation, transmission, and distribution)
and can overload many network components and will require components upgrade which represents
high investment costs for system operators. A more cost-eﬀective solution to these issues is using
proper charging methods. The studies proved that simple charging method like delayed charging,
which only depends on variable electricity prices during the day, can shift most of the EVs load
to oﬀ-peak hours by motivating EV owners to decrease the charging costs.
Delayed charging
can lead to reducing the increase in peak demand, reduce the number of overloaded components,
postpone infrastructure upgrades, and valley ﬁlling. A more advanced charging method is controlled
charging, where EVs can change their charging time and power depending on many variables such as
electricity prices, load demand, components loading, grid constraints, etc., depending on the proposed
control strategy. Controlled charging can lead to reduced charging costs, reduced increase in peak
demand, reduction in the number of overloaded components, delay in network components upgrade,
and valley ﬁlling. Moreover, the use of V2G, V2B, and V2B can provide more beneﬁts to the grid and
EV owners. By injecting stored energy in EV batteries to the grid, the peak demand can be shaved
(i.e., peak shaving) and reduce power system operation costs by shutting down generation units with
high operating costs. Furthermore, they can defer the need for infrastructure upgrades, gain revenue
for EV owners by charging when the electricity price is low and discharge when the electricity price is
high (i.e., energy arbitrage), and reduce home or building electricity bills.
5.4. Improving Power Quality
Although single phase uncontrolled charging of EVs may cause a severe eﬀect on system
unbalance, controlled charging methods can decrease system unbalance. In [139], the reduction of
voltage unbalance by controlling EVs charging current was tested experimentally. The proposed
control method is autonomous and depends only on local voltage measurement without the need
for infrastructure upgrade and expensive communication infrastructure. The results proved that the
proposed EVs controlled charging method can reduce voltage unbalance and minimize voltage drop.
In another study, a method based on PV and EVs interaction for voltage unbalance minimization was
tested in [140]. In [141], an optimization algorithm was used to control the charging and discharging
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
22 of 34
of EVs to minimize VUF. An unbalanced distribution network with 1.93% VUF was used to test the
proposed strategy. Uncontrolled charging of EVs increased the VUF signiﬁcantly to 7.7%. The controlled
charging of EVs declined the VUF to 0.71%. Controlled charging and discharging of EVs dropped
the VUF to 0.5%. To control the voltage unbalance, the number of EVs connected at each phase
was optimized using a genetic algorithm in [142]. The authors of [143] proposed a hybrid method
combining centralized controlled charging of EVs and decentralized controlled discharging of reactive
power for voltage unbalance minimization. The proposed strategy was eﬀective in reducing VUF
compared to uncontrolled charging case.
It was presented in Section 4.3 that EV chargers can result in signiﬁcant harmonic distortion.
However, the proper design of charger power electronics circuits and control methods can minimize
or eliminate this issue. Few studies proposed EV chargers that cause no harmonic distortion or can
provide harmonic ﬁltering. A novel control strategy applied to onboard bidirectional three phase EV
charger was proposed in [144]. The proposed method enabled the charger to draw or inject sinusoidal
current with no harmonics regardless of the power quality of the grid. Another study [144] proposed
EV charger that can operate as active ﬁlter and eliminate the harmonics caused by other loads at the
charger connection point in addition to providing reactive power compensation. In [145], the EV
charging station was used to eliminate the harmonics in distribution network by acting as active ﬁlter.
The high penetration of PV generation at distribution network can cause power quality issues due
to its intermittent nature and dependence on weather conditions. The variation of weather conditions
(i.e., clouds) results in ﬂuctuation of PV power output which can cause voltage ﬂuctuation and light
ﬂicker. Therefore, DSOs need to develop mechanisms to mitigate power quality issues caused by the
ﬂuctuation of PV output. Several studies proposed controlled charging of EVs as a possible solution to
alleviate the ﬂuctuations caused by PV generation [146–148]. For instance, reference [148] assessed the
impacts of rapid variation of PV output on voltage ﬂuctuation at low voltage distribution network
for three scenarios. The study proposed a controlled charging of EVs to mitigate voltage ﬂuctuations.
The results proved the eﬀectiveness of the proposed strategy in reducing voltage ﬂuctuations and
accompanied light ﬂicker.
The previous sections demonstrated that EVs can provide many beneﬁts and services to electric
power systems. A very important secondary beneﬁt that EVs can provide is helping the integration of
RESs. It is well known that to face environmental challenges and depletion of fossil fuel, large capacities
of RESs are being installed worldwide. Most of RESs installations are PV and wind due to the
technology advancement and fast drop in their prices. Electricity generation from RESs like PV
and wind are variable and intermittent depending on environmental conditions (i.e., sun and wind)
and hard to predict or forecast. This increases ﬂuctuation and uncertainty in power system besides
load ﬂuctuation [149]. Moreover, they are non-dispatchable generation and they cannot change the
generated power following demand variations like traditional power plants, which increase the need
for more ﬂexibility in the power system which cannot be provided by central power plants only.
More ﬂexibility in the power system can be achieved from distribution systems by demand response
(i.e., controllable or dispatchable loads) and energy storage.
Till now there is no economical utility-scale energy storage technology. EVs can act as controllable
loads by controlled charging and as energy storage by V2G, V2B, and V2H. Several studies investigated
how EVs can enable integrating more RESs [150]. EVs can absorb excess RESs generation and deliver
it to the grid when needed. In [151], it was concluded that EVs and heat pumps can reduce the cost
of integrating RESs, such as required balancing cost and required back-up generation cost. In [152],
based on the German 2030 scenario of RESs penetration, it was found that by controlling EVs charging
more RESs can be integrated into the power system. In [153], two case studies were considered for
Germany and California 2030 scenario with a high share of EVs and RESs. It concluded that the smart
charging of EVs can mitigate RESs ﬂuctuation.
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
23 of 34
Reference [154], investigated the impact of V2G on two power systems and with diﬀerent
penetration of wind generation, from 0% to 100%. It was found that V2G can enable a higher share of
wind power generation in the power system. An optimization strategy was tested in [155] to schedule
the charging of EVs which were connected to microgrid with PV and wind generation. The proposed
strategy achieved load leveling in addition to reducing microgrid operating costs and EVs charging
costs. The impact of EVs operating at controlled charging mode or V2G mode on the operation of a
power system with high share of RESs was examined in [156]. Results showed that controlled EVs
charging and discharging reduced deployed reserves usage, better usage of renewable generation by
reducing wind spillage, and reduced operation cost. In [157], it was found that controlled charging
and discharging of EVs can reduce operation costs and reduce emissions, besides maximizing RESs
utilization. In [158], an optimization algorithm was used to manage EVs charging and discharging to
increase the penetration of RESs. The proposed strategy was able to increase PV penetration up to 50%.
6. Discussions and Future Research Directions
The main contribution of this article is to provide a review of potential negative impacts of EVs
charging on electric power systems mainly due to uncontrolled charging, and how through proper
charging and discharging methods, those impacts can be reduced and become even positive impacts as
discussed in Sections 4 and 5. For each potential negative impact or positive impact of EVs, the ﬁndings
and conclusions of a few research papers were discussed as examples of the research done at each
point to clarify it. Figure 8 provides a summary of the negative impacts of uncontrolled EVs charging
on the electric power system and how these impacts can be mitigated or even become positive impacts
using suitable charging and discharging methods.
Figure 8. Uncontrolled charging negative impacts on the power system and how it can be mitigated
and become positive impact using the proper charging/discharging method.
As described in previous sections, there is a lot of ongoing research on the integration of EVs
to electric power system, focusing on accurate evaluation of the negative impacts of uncontrolled
EV charging or the services and beneﬁts EVs may provide if other smart charging and discharging
methods are used. Other research areas that are being investigated by researchers are:
•
Cost–beneﬁt analysis of diﬀerent charging and discharging methods
Most of the studies that investigate the beneﬁts that smart charging and discharging methods
can provide focus on the technical feasibility and charging cost. However, there is a need to assess
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
24 of 34
the cost of providing these services on EV batteries degradation, because EV battery is a very
expensive component in EVs. After that, the economic feasibility of diﬀerent charging and discharging
methods can be accurately estimated. Reference [159] executed a cost–beneﬁt analysis of controlled
charging and V2G implementation considering EV batteries degradation cost. The results showed
that controlled charging is economical. Moreover, the study concluded that V2G implementation is
not economical without wind generation presence, while it is economical in the presence of wind
generation. This area requires more studies to evaluate the economic feasibility of diﬀerent EV smart
charging and discharging methods on diﬀerent case studies and diﬀerent scenarios. The diﬀerent
scenarios can consider the economic feasibility of using EVs to provide various services (i.e., frequency
regulation, voltage regulation, congestion management, etc.; or consider diﬀerent power systems with
diﬀerent characteristics (i.e., presence of diﬀerent types of RESs, diﬀerent penetration levels of RESs,
types of power plants, etc.).
•
Coordination between transmission system operator (TSO) and distribution system operator
(DSO) for providing EV services
As explained in previous sections, EVs can provide many local and system-wide power and energy
services. Figure 9 summarizes the services provided to diﬀerent power system parties (i.e., transmission
system operator (TSO), DSO, and loads such as buildings or homes) [160]. It is worth mentioning that
the provision of system-wide services by EVs may result in issues at distribution system at which EVs
are connected which may result in conﬂict of interests between TSO and DSO. For instance, the use
of EVs to provide a TSO service such as frequency regulation which requires continuous change at
charging and discharging power may cause negative impacts at the distribution system managed by
DSO such as overloading of distribution network components, phase unbalance, etc. Therefore, there is
a need for coordination between TSO and DSO to guarantee reliable and cost-eﬃcient EVs based
services [161,162]. This topic is rarely investigated in the literature and there many open questions that
require study. Therefore, it requires more attention in future research.
 
Figure 9. EV services provided to diﬀerent power system parties.
•
Planning of public charging Infrastructure
With the large-scale adoption of EVs in the near future, many public EV charging stations will be
deployed in streets, highways, workplaces, shopping centers, etc. One of the main challenges for EVs
acceptance is its limited range compared to ICEVs and driver range anxiety. Therefore, the EV chargers
deployment must be planned accurately and eﬃciently to achieve both transportation and power system
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
25 of 34
objectives and needs. Many studies investigated the planning of future EV charging infrastructure.
The studies considered the optimal location and capacity of EV chargers [163]. Some studies considered
the transportation network only without considering power system conditions.
Other studies
considered the power system only without considering transportation networks. These studies
consider power system economic and operation constraints while reducing investments required for
power system infrastructure upgrade. It is worth mentioning that EV charging stations couple both
transportation network and power system; therefore, both must be taken into account at EV charging
infrastructure planning. Few studies considered both transportation network and power system at the
planning of EV chargers [164], because EV infrastructure planning studies require real data for both
the transportation sector and power system, which varies between countries. There is a room for more
research in this area considering diﬀerent case studies.
7. Conclusions
The paper presented EVs technology and the current need for it as well as its beneﬁts compared
to traditional vehicles in addition to challenges it must tackle to achieve high adoption and social
acceptance. Furthermore, it presented the current EVs market and future predictions. Diﬀerent charging
technologies were presented such as conductive charging, which is the current charging method and
other charging methods such as wireless charging and battery swapping which may have future
potential. A review of the negative impacts that EV may cause on electric power systems if uncontrolled
EV charging is used was presented. Conclusions of many studies that assessed these impacts were
discussed. All the studies showed that uncontrolled EV charging will result in unwanted negative
impacts on the power system especially the distribution networks and it will foster the need for
infrastructure upgrade. The severity of these impacts varies between diﬀerent studies due to many
uncertainties in EV charging impacts studies (e.g., distribution system status, EV battery capacity,
EV battery SoC, time and location of charging, EV charger power rating, and EV penetration level).
The paper also showed that these impacts can be mitigated using delayed charging and controlled
charging methods, which can beneﬁt both the power system and EV owner. More beneﬁts and electrical
services can be obtained from EVs with advanced charging control methods like V2G, V2B, and V2H.
Diﬀerent electrical services that can be provided with controlled charging/discharging of EVs were
presented and discussed. This review article brieﬂy discussed the main research areas that are being
investigated for the integration of EVs to sustainable future power system, which can be helpful for
engineers and researchers. It further discussed a few interesting research topics that need more study
in future research.
Author Contributions: M.N. wrote the manuscript ﬁrst draft. J.P.C.-Á., G.M., and Á.S.-M. reviewed, edited,
and suggested modiﬁcations to the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
List of abbreviations used in this paper.
AC
Alternating Current
BEV
Battery Electric Vehicles
BSS
Battery Swapping Stations
CO2
Carbon Dioxide
DC
Direct Current
DG
Distributed Generation
DSO
Distribution System Operator
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
26 of 34
EM
Electric Motor
EV
Electric Vehicle
EVSE
Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment
FCEV
Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle
G2V
Grid to Vehicle
GHGs
Greenhouse gases
h
Hour
HEV
Hybrid Electric Vehicles
ICE
Internal Combustion Engine
ICEV
Internal Combustion Engine Vehicle
IEA
International Energy Agency
IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IWC
Inductive Wireless Charging
km
Kilometer
kVA
Kilo volt ampere
kW
Kilowatt
kWh
Kilowatt hour
LFC
Load Frequency Control
Li-ion
Lithium-ion
OLTC
On-Load Tap Changer
PFC
Primary Frequency Control
PHEV
Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles
PLDV
passenger light-duty vehicles
PV
Photovoltaic
RES
Renewable Energy Source
SoC
State of Charge
THD
Total Harmonic Distortion
THDi
Total Harmonic Distortion of current
THDv
Total Harmonic Distortion of Voltage
ToU
Time of Use
TSO
Transmission System Operator
V2B
Vehicle to Building
V2G
Vehicle to Grid
V2H
Vehicle to Home
VUF
Voltage Unbalance Factor
WC
Wireless Charging
References
1.
UNFCCC; Conference of the Parties (COP). Adoption of the Paris Agreement Proposal by the President.
In Proceedings of the Paris Climate Change Conference, Paris, France, 30 November–12 December 2015.
2.
Labatt, S.; White, R.R. Carbon Finance: The Financial Implications of Climate Change; John Wiley & Sons:
Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2007.
3.
OECD. World Energy Statistics 2017; OECD: Paris, France, 2017.
4.
Shaukat, N.; Khan, B.; Ali, S.; Mehmood, C.; Khan, J.; Farid, U.; Majid, M.; Anwar, S.M.; Jawad, M.; Ullah, Z.
A survey on electric vehicle transportation within smart grid system. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2018, 81,
1329–1349. [CrossRef]
5.
Hedegaard, K.; Ravn, H.; Juul, N.; Meibom, P. Eﬀects of electric vehicles on power systems in Northern
Europe. Energy 2012, 48, 356–368. [CrossRef]
6.
Nanaki, E.A.; Koroneos, C.J. Comparative economic and environmental analysis of conventional, hybrid and
electric vehicles—The case study of Greece. J. Clean. Prod. 2013, 53, 261–266. [CrossRef]
7.
Agency, I.E. Global EV Outlook 2019 to electric mobility. IEA Publ. 2019.
8.
Knez, M.; Zevnik, G.K.; Obrecht, M. A review of available chargers for electric vehicles: United States of
America, European Union, and Asia. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2019, 109, 284–293. [CrossRef]
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
27 of 34
9.
Dubey, A.; Santoso, S. Electric Vehicle Charging on Residential Distribution Systems: Impacts and Mitigations.
IEEE Access 2015, 3, 1871–1893. [CrossRef]
10.
García-Villalobos, J.; Zamora, I.; Martin, J.S.; Asensio, F.J.; Aperribay, V. Plug-in electric vehicles in electric
distribution networks: A review of smart charging approaches. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2014, 38, 717–731.
[CrossRef]
11.
Haus, B.; Mercorelli, P. Polynomial Augmented Extended Kalman Filter to Estimate the State of Charge of
Lithium-Ion Batteries. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2020, 69, 1452–1463. [CrossRef]
12.
Nour, M.; Said, S.M.; Ali, A.; Farkas, C. Smart Charging of Electric Vehicles According to Electricity Price.
In Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Innovative Trends in Computer Engineering ITCE,
Aswan, Egypt, 2–4 February 2019; pp. 432–437. [CrossRef]
13.
Naﬁsi, H. Investigation on distribution transformer loss-of-life due to plug-in hybrid electric vehicles
charging. Int. J. Ambient. Energy 2019, 1–7. [CrossRef]
14.
Nour, M.; Ramadan, H.; Ali, A.; Farkas, C. Impacts of plug-in electric vehicles charging on low voltage
distribution network. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Innovative Trends in Computer
Engineering (ITCE), Aswan, Egypt, 19–21 February 2018; pp. 357–362.
15.
Tong, X.; Ma, Q.; Tang, K.; Liu, H.; Li, C. Inﬂuence of electric vehicle access mode on the static voltage stability
margin and accommodated capacity of the distribution network. J. Eng. 2019, 2019, 2658–2662. [CrossRef]
16.
Nour, M.; Ali, A.; Farkas, C. Mitigation of Electric Vehicles Charging Impacts on Distribution Network
with Photovoltaic Generation. In Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Innovative Trends in
Computer Engineering (ITCE), Aswan, Egypt, 19–21 February 2018; pp. 384–388.
17.
Ul-Haq, A.; Azhar, M.; Mahmoud, Y.; Perwaiz, A.; Al-Ammar, E.A. Probabilistic Modeling of Electric Vehicle
Charging Pattern Associated with Residential Load for Voltage Unbalance Assessment. Energies 2017, 10,
1351. [CrossRef]
18.
Leou, R.-C.; Teng, J.-H.; Lu, H.-J.; Lan, B.-R.; Chen, H.-T.; Hsieh, T.-Y.; Su, C.-L. Stochastic analysis of electric
transportation charging impacts on power quality of distribution systems. IET Gener. Transm. Distrib. 2018,
12, 2725–2734. [CrossRef]
19.
Yong, J.Y.; Ramachandaramurthy, V.K.; Tan, K.M.; Mithulananthan, N. A review on the state-of-the-art
technologies of electric vehicle, its impacts and prospects. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2015, 49, 365–385.
[CrossRef]
20.
Hota, A.R.; Juvvanapudi, M.; Bajpai, P. Issues and solution approaches in PHEV integration to the smart
grid. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2014, 30, 217–229. [CrossRef]
21.
Richardson, D.B. Electric vehicles and the electric grid: A review of modeling approaches, Impacts, and
renewable energy integration. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2013, 19, 247–254. [CrossRef]
22.
Talebizadeh, E.; Rashidinejad, M.; Abdollahi, A. Evaluation of plug-in electric vehicles impact on cost-based
unit commitment. J. Power Sources 2014, 248, 545–552. [CrossRef]
23.
Lyon, T.P.; Michelin, M.; Jongejan, A.; Leahy, T. Is “smart charging” policy for electric vehicles worthwhile?
Energy Policy 2012, 41, 259–268. [CrossRef]
24.
Weis, A.; Jaramillo, P.; Michalek, J.J. Estimating the potential of controlled plug-in hybrid electric vehicle
charging to reduce operational and capacity expansion costs for electric power systems with high wind
penetration. Appl. Energy 2014, 115, 190–204. [CrossRef]
25.
Windecker, A.; Ruder, A. Fuel economy, cost, and greenhouse gas results for alternative fuel vehicles in 2011.
Transp. Res. Part. D Transp. Environ. 2013, 23, 34–40. [CrossRef]
26.
Karabasoglu, O.; Michalek, J.J. Inﬂuence of driving patterns on life cycle cost and emissions of hybrid and
plug-in electric vehicle powertrains. Energy Policy 2013, 60, 445–461. [CrossRef]
27.
Lunz, B.; Yan, Z.; Gerschler, J.B.; Sauer, D.U. Inﬂuence of plug-in hybrid electric vehicle charging strategies
on charging and battery degradation costs. Energy Policy 2012, 46, 511–519. [CrossRef]
28.
Gass, V.; Schmidt, J.; Schmid, E. Analysis of alternative policy instruments to promote electric vehicles in
Austria. Renew. Energy 2014, 61, 96–101. [CrossRef]
29.
Tie, S.F.; Tan, C.W. A review of energy sources and energy management system in electric vehicles.
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2013, 20, 82–102. [CrossRef]
30.
Un-Noor, F.; Padmanaban, S.; Mihet-Popa, L.; Mollah, M.N.; Hossain, E. A Comprehensive Study of Key
Electric Vehicle (EV) Components, Technologies, Challenges, Impacts, and Future Direction of Development.
Energies 2017, 10, 1217. [CrossRef]
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
28 of 34
31.
Andwari, A.M.; Pesiridis, A.; Rajoo, S.; Martinez-Botas, R.; Esfahanian, V. A review of Battery Electric Vehicle
technology and readiness levels. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017, 78, 414–430. [CrossRef]
32.
Singh, B.; Chandra, A.; Al-Haddad, K.; Pandey, A.; Kothari, D.P. A review of single-phase improved power
quality ac~dc converters. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 2003, 50, 962–981. [CrossRef]
33.
Singh, B.; Singh, B.; Chandra, A.; Al-Haddad, K.; Pandey, A.; Kothari, D. A Review of Three-Phase Improved
Power Quality AC–DC Converters. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 2004, 51, 641–660. [CrossRef]
34.
Yılmaz, M.; Krein, P.T.; Yilmaz, M. Review of charging power levels and infrastructure for plug-in electric
and hybrid vehicles. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE International Electric Vehicle Conference (IEVC),
Greenville, SC, USA, 4–8 March 2012; pp. 1–8. [CrossRef]
35.
Young, K.; Wang, C.; Wang, L.Y.; Strunz, K. Electric Vehicle Integration into Modern Power Networks; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2013.
36.
Botsford, C.; Szczepanek, A. Fast Charging vs. Slow Charging: Pros and cons for the New Age of Electric
Vehicles. Int. Battery Hybrid Fuel Cell Electr. Veh. Symp. 2009.
37.
Yang, Y.; El Baghdadi, M.; Lan, Y.; Benomar, Y.; Van Mierlo, J.; Hegazy, O. Design Methodology, Modeling,
and Comparative Study of Wireless Power Transfer Systems for Electric Vehicles. Energies 2018, 11, 1716.
[CrossRef]
38.
Cao, Y.; Ahmad, N.; Kaiwartya, O.; Puturs, G.; Khalid, M. Intelligent Transportation Systems Enabled ICT
Framework for Electric Vehicle Charging in Smart City. In Handbook of Smart Cities; Springer Science and
Business Media LLC: Berlin, Germany, 2018; pp. 311–330.
39.
Wang, Z.; Wei, X.; Dai, H. Design and Control of a 3 kW Wireless Power Transfer System for Electric Vehicles.
Energies 2015, 9, 10. [CrossRef]
40.
Musavi, F.; Eberle, W. Overview of wireless power transfer technologies for electric vehicle battery charging.
IET Power Electron. 2014, 7, 60–66. [CrossRef]
41.
Li, S.; Mi, C.C. Wireless power transfer for electric vehicle applications. IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Top. Power Electron.
2015, 3, 4–17.
42.
Ahmad, A.; Khan, Z.A.; Alam, M.S.; Khateeb, S. A Review of the Electric Vehicle Charging Techniques,
Standards, Progression and Evolution of EV Technologies in Germany. Smart Sci. 2017, 6, 36–53. [CrossRef]
43.
Sarker, M.; Pandži´c, H.; Ortega-Vazquez, M. Optimal operation and services scheduling for an electric vehicle
battery swapping station. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting, Denver,
CO, USA, 26–30 July 2015.
44.
Zheng, Y.; Dong, Z.; Xu, Y.; Meng, K.; Zhao, J.H.; Qiu, J. Electric Vehicle Battery Charging/Swap Stations in
Distribution Systems: Comparison Study and Optimal Planning. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2013, 29, 221–229.
[CrossRef]
45.
Sarker, M.R.; Pandži´c, H.; Ortega-Vazquez, M. Electric vehicle battery swapping station: Business case and
optimization model. In Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Connected Vehicles and Expo
(ICCVE), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 2–6 December 2013; pp. 289–294. [CrossRef]
46.
Rao, R.; Zhang, X.; Xie, J.; Ju, L. Optimizing electric vehicle users’ charging behavior in battery swapping
mode. Appl. Energy 2015, 155, 547–559. [CrossRef]
47.
Yang, S.; Yao, J.; Kang, T.; Zhu, X. Dynamic operation model of the battery swapping station for EV (electric
vehicle) in electricity market. Energy 2014, 65, 544–549. [CrossRef]
48.
Electric Car Maker Tesla Unveils 90-s Battery Pack Swap—Reuters. Available online: https://www.reuters.com/
article/us-tesla-swap/electric-car-maker-tesla-unveils-90-s-battery-pack-swap-idUSBRE95K07H20130621
(accessed on 31 December 2019).
49.
Shareef, H.; Islam, M.; Mohamed, A. A review of the stage-of-the-art charging technologies, placement
methodologies, and impacts of electric vehicles. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2016, 64, 403–420. [CrossRef]
50.
Alshahrani, S.; Khalid, M.; AlMuhaini, M.M. Electric Vehicles Beyond Energy Storage and Modern Power
Networks: Challenges and Applications. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 99031–99064. [CrossRef]
51.
Papathanassiou, S.; Nikos, H.; Kai, S. A benchmark low voltage microgrid network. In Proceedings of the
CIGRE Symposium: Power Systems with Dispersed Generation, Athens, Greece, 13–16 April 2005; pp. 1–8.
52.
Shao, S.; Zhang, T.; Pipattanasomporn, M.; Rahman, S. Impact of TOU rates on distribution load shapes in a
smart grid with PHEV penetration. IEEE PES T&D 2010 2010, 1–6. [CrossRef]
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
29 of 34
53.
Gao, Y.; Wang, C.; Wang, Z.; Liang, H. Research on time-of-use price applying to electric vehicles charging.
In Proceedings of the IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies, Berlin, Germany, 14–17 October 2012;
pp. 1–6.
54.
Tan, K.M.; Ramachandaramurthy, V.K.; Yong, J.Y. Integration of electric vehicles in smart grid: A review on
vehicle to grid technologies and optimization techniques. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2016, 53, 720–732.
[CrossRef]
55.
Rahman, I.; Vasant, P.M.; Singh, M.S.B.; Abdullah-Al-Wadud, M.; Adnan, N. Review of recent trends in
optimization techniques for plug-in hybrid, and electric vehicle charging infrastructures. Renew. Sustain.
Energy Rev. 2016, 58, 1039–1047. [CrossRef]
56.
Faddel, S.; Al-Awami, A.T.; Mohammed, O.A. Charge Control and Operation of Electric Vehicles in Power
Grids: A Review. Energies 2018, 11, 701. [CrossRef]
57.
Faddel, S.; Mohamed, A.A.S.; Mohammed, O.A. Fuzzy logic-based autonomous controller for electric
vehicles charging under diﬀerent conditions in residential distribution systems. Electr. Power Syst. Res. 2017,
148, 48–58. [CrossRef]
58.
Al-Awami, A.T.; Sortomme, E.; Akhtar, G.M.A.; Faddel, S. A Voltage-Based Controller for an Electric-Vehicle
Charger. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2015, 65, 4185–4196. [CrossRef]
59.
Saldaña, G.; Martin, J.S.; Zamora, I.; Asensio, F.J.; Oñederra, O. Electric Vehicle into the Grid: Charging
Methodologies Aimed at Providing Ancillary Services Considering Battery Degradation. Energies 2019, 12,
2443. [CrossRef]
60.
Habib, S.; Kamran, M.; Rashid, U. Impact analysis of vehicle-to-grid technology and charging strategies of
electric vehicles on distribution networks—A review. J. Power Sources 2015, 277, 205–214. [CrossRef]
61.
Thompson, A. Economic implications of lithium ion battery degradation for Vehicle-to-Grid (V2X) services.
J. Power Sources 2018, 396, 691–709. [CrossRef]
62.
Pang, C.; Dutta, P.; Kezunovic, M. BEVs/PHEVs as Dispersed Energy Storage for V2B Uses in the Smart Grid.
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2011, 3, 473–482. [CrossRef]
63.
Shin, H.; Baldick, R. Plug-In Electric Vehicle to Home (V2H) Operation Under a Grid Outage. IEEE Trans.
Smart Grid 2017, 8, 2032–2041. [CrossRef]
64.
Alahyari, A.; Fotuhi-Firuzabad, M.; Rastegar, M. Incorporating Customer Reliability Cost in PEV Charge
Scheduling Schemes Considering Vehicle to Home Capability. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2014, 64, 1. [CrossRef]
65.
Habib, S.; Khan, M.M.; Abbas, F.; Sang, L.; Shahid, M.U.; Tang, H. A Comprehensive Study of Implemented
International Standards, Technical Challenges, Impacts and Prospects for Electric Vehicles. IEEE Access 2018,
6, 13866–13890. [CrossRef]
66.
Bohn, S.; Feustel, R.; Agsten, M. MC-based Risk Analysis on the Capacity of Distribution Grids to Charge
PEVs on 3-ph 0.4-kV Distribution Grids Considering Time and Location Uncertainties. SAE Int. J. Passeng.
Cars Electron. Electr. Syst. 2015, 8, 394–400. [CrossRef]
67.
Ahmadian, A.; Mohammadi-Ivatloo, B.; Elkamel, A. A Review on Plug-in Electric Vehicles: Introduction,
Current Status, and Load Modeling Techniques. J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean Energy 2020, 8, 412–425. [CrossRef]
68.
Wang, Z.; Paranjape, R. An Evaluation of Electric Vehicle Penetration under Demand Response in a
Multi-Agent Based Simulation. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE Electrical Power and Energy Conference,
Calgary, AB, Canada, 12–14 November 2014; pp. 220–225.
69.
Putrus, G.A.; Suwanapingkarl, P.; Johnston, D.; Bentley, E.C.; Narayana, M. Impact of electric vehicles on
power distribution networks. In Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE Vehicle Power and Propulsion Conference,
Dearborn, MI, USA, 7–10 September 2009; pp. 827–831.
70.
McCarthy, D.; Wolfs, P. The HV system impacts of large scale electric vehicle deployments in a metropolitan
area. In Proceedings of the AUPEC 2010—20th Australasian Universities Power Engineering Conference
2010, Christchurch, New Zealand, 5 December 2010.
71.
Schneider, K.P.; Gerkensmeyer, C.; Kintner-Meyer, M.; Fletcher, R. Impact assessment of plug-in hybrid
vehicles on paciﬁc northwest distribution systems. In Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE Power and Energy
Society General Meeting—Conversion and Delivery of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA, 20–24 July 2008; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
72.
Kelly, L.; Rowe, A.; Wild, P. Analyzing the impacts of plug-in electric vehicles on distribution networks in
British Columbia. In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE Electrical Power and Energy Conference, Montreal, QC,
Canada, 22–23 October 2009; Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE); pp. 1–6.
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
30 of 34
73.
Shao, S.; Pipattanasomporn, M.; Rahman, S. Grid Integration of Electric Vehicles and Demand Response
with Customer Choice. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2012, 3, 543–550. [CrossRef]
74.
Crozier, C.; Morstyn, T.; McCulloch, M. The opportunity for smart charging to mitigate the impact of electric
vehicles on transmission and distribution systems. Appl. Energy 2020, 268, 114973. [CrossRef]
75.
Kristoﬀersen, T.K.; Capion, K.; Meibom, P. Optimal charging of electric drive vehicles in a market environment.
Appl. Energy 2011, 88, 1940–1948. [CrossRef]
76.
Denholm, P.; Short, W. Evaluation of Utility System Impacts and Beneﬁts of Optimally Dispatched Plug-In Hybrid
Electric Vehicles; NREL: Golden, CO, USA, 2006.
77.
Drovtar, I.; Rosin, A.; Landsberg, M.; Kilter, J. Large scale electric vehicle integration and its impact on the
Estonian power system. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Grenoble Conference, Grenoble, France, 16–20 June
2013; Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE); pp. 1–6.
78.
Van Cutsem, T. Voltage instability: Phenomena, countermeasures, and analysis methods. Proc. IEEE 2000,
88, 208–227. [CrossRef]
79.
Dharmakeerthi, C.; Mithulananthan, N.; Saha, T.K. Impact of electric vehicle fast charging on power system
voltage stability. Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst. 2014, 57, 241–249. [CrossRef]
80.
Clement-Nyns, K.; Haesen, E.; Driesen, J. The Impact of Charging Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles on a
Residential Distribution Grid. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2009, 25, 371–380. [CrossRef]
81.
Gray, M.K.; Morsi, W.G. Power Quality Assessment in Distribution Systems Embedded With Plug-In Hybrid
and Battery Electric Vehicles. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2014, 30, 663–671. [CrossRef]
82.
Xiong, J.; Zhang, K.; Liu, X.; Su, W. Investigating the impact of plug-in electric vehicle charging on power
distribution systems with the integrated modeling and simulation of transportation network. In Proceedings
of the ITEC Asia-Paciﬁc 2014—IEEE Transportation Electriﬁcation Conference & Expo 2014, Beijing, China,
31 August–3 September 2014; pp. 1–5. [CrossRef]
83.
Soroudi, A.; Keane, A. Plug in Electric Vehicles in Smart Grids; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2015;
p. 89.
84.
Ul-Haq, A.; Cecati, C.; Strunz, K.; Abbasi, E. Impact of Electric Vehicle Charging on Voltage Unbalance in an
Urban Distribution Network. Intell. Ind. Syst. 2015, 1, 51–60. [CrossRef]
85.
Shahnia, F.; Ghosh, A.; Ledwich, G.; Zare, F. Predicting Voltage Unbalance Impacts of Plug-in Electric
Vehicles Penetration in Residential Low-voltage Distribution Networks. Electr. Power Compon. Syst. 2013, 41,
1594–1616. [CrossRef]
86.
Richardson, P.; Flynn, D.; Keane, A. Impact assessment of varying penetrations of electric vehicles
on low voltage distribution systems.
In Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE Power and Energy Society
General Meeting—Conversion and Delivery of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century, Providence, RI,
USA, 25–29 July 2010; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
87.
Liu, R.; Dow, L.; Liu, E. A survey of PEV impacts on electric utilities. In Proceedings of the Innovative Smart
Grid Technologies (ISGT), 2011 IEEE PES, Perth, Australia, 13–16 November 2011.
88.
Jiang, C.; Torquato, R.; Salles, D.; Xu, W. Method to assess the power quality impact of plug-in electric
vehicles. In Proceedings of the 2014 16th International Conference on Harmonics and Quality of Power,
Bucharest, Romania, 25–28 May 2014; pp. 177–180. [CrossRef]
89.
Bass, R.; Harley, R.; Lambert, F.; Rajasekaran, V.; Pierce, J. Residential harmonic loads and EV charging.
In Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE Power Engineering Society Winter Meeting Conference Proceedings (Cat No
01CH37194), Columbus, OH, USA, 28 January–1 February 2001; pp. 803–808. [CrossRef]
90.
Nguyen, V.-L.; Tran-Quoc, T.; Bacha, S. Harmonic distortion mitigation for electric vehicle fast charging
systems. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Grenoble Conference, Grenoble, France, 16–20 June 2013; pp. 1–6.
91.
Melo, N.; Mira, F.; De Almeida, A.; Delgado, J. Integration of PEV in Portuguese distribution grid: Analysis
of harmonic current emissions in charging points. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on
Electrical Power Quality and Utilisation, Lisbon, Portugal, 17–19 October 2011; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
92.
Monteiro, V.; Gonçalves, H.; Afonso, J.L. Impact of Electric Vehicles on power quality in a Smart Grid context.
In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Electrical Power Quality and Utilisation, Lisbon,
Portugal, 17–19 October 2011; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
93.
Gomez, J.; Morcos, M. Impact of EV battery chargers on the power quality of distribution systems. IEEE Trans.
Power Deliv. 2003, 18, 975–981. [CrossRef]
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
31 of 34
94.
Zhou, C.; Wang, H.; Zhou, W.; Qian, K.; Meng, S. Determination of maximum level of EV penetration with
consideration of EV charging load and harmonic currents. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 2019, 342,
012010. [CrossRef]
95.
Hilshey, A.D.; Rezaei, P.; Hines, P.D.H.; Frolik, J. Electric vehicle charging: Transformer impacts and smart,
decentralized solutions. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE Power Energy Society General Meeting, San Diego,
CA, USA, 22–26 July 2012; pp. 1–8. [CrossRef]
96.
Papadopoulos, P.; Skarvelis-Kazakos, S.; Grau, I.; Awad, B.; Cipcigan, L.M.; Jenkins, N. Impact of residential
charging of electric vehicles on distribution networks, a probabilistic approach. In Proceedings of the 45th
International Universities Power Engineering Conference, Cardiﬀ, UK, 31 August–3 September 2010; pp. 1–5.
97.
Verzijlbergh, R.A.; Lukszo, Z.; Slootweg, J.G.; Ilic, M.D. The impact of controlled electric vehicle charging
on residential low voltage networks. In Proceedings of the 2011 International Conference on Networking,
Sensing and Control, Delft, The Netherlands, 11–13 April 2011; pp. 14–19. [CrossRef]
98.
Turker, H.; Chatroux, D.; Hably, A.; Bacha, S. Low-Voltage Transformer Loss-of-Life Assessments for a High
Penetration of Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEVs). IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 2012, 27, 1323–1331.
[CrossRef]
99.
Hilshey, A.; Hines, P.; Rezai, P.; Dowds, J. Estimating the impact of electric vehicle smart charging on
distribution transformer aging. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Power Energy Society General Meeting,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, 21–25 July 2013; p. 1. [CrossRef]
100. Razeghi, G.; Zhang, L.; Brown, T.; Samuelsen, S. Impacts of plug-in hybrid electric vehicles on a residential
transformer using stochastic and empirical analysis. J. Power Sources 2014, 252, 277–285. [CrossRef]
101. Yan, Q.; Kezunovic, M. Impact analysis of Electric Vehicle charging on distribution system. In Proceedings of
the 2012 North American Power Symposium (NAPS), Champaign, IL, USA, 9-11 September 2012; pp. 1–6.
102. Akhavan-Rezai, E.; Shaaban, M.F.; El-Saadany, E.F.; Zidan, A. Uncoordinated charging impacts of electric
vehicles on electric distribution grids: Normal and fast charging comparison. In Proceedings of the 2012
IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting, San Diego, CA, USA, 22–26 July 2012; pp. 1–7.
103. Fernandez, L.P.; GomezSanRoman, T.; Cossent, R.; Domingo, C.M.; Frias, P. Assessment of the Impact of
Plug-in Electric Vehicles on Distribution Networks. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2010, 26, 206–213. [CrossRef]
104. Pillai, J.R.; Bak-Jensen, B. Impacts of electric vehicle loads on power distribution systems. In Proceedings of
the 2010 IEEE Vehicle Power and Propulsion Conference, Lille, France, 1–3 September 2010; pp. 1–6.
105. Masoum, M.A.; Moses, P.S.; Smedley, K.M. Distribution transformer losses and performance in smart grids with
residential Plug-In Electric Vehicles. In Proceedings of the ISGT 2011, Anaheim, CA, USA, 17–19 January 2011.
106. Deb, S.; Tammi, K.; Kalita, K.; Mahanta, P. Impact of Electric Vehicle Charging Station Load on Distribution
Network. Energies 2018, 11, 178. [CrossRef]
107. Chang, M.; Bae, S.; Yoon, G.-G.; Park, S.-H.; Choy, Y. Impact of Electric Vehicle Charging Demand on a Jeju
Island Radial Distribution Network. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Power & Energy Society Innovative
Smart Grid Technologies Conference (ISGT), Bucharest, Romania, 29 September–2 October 2019; pp. 1–5.
108. Tomi´c, J.; Kempton, W. Using ﬂeets of electric-drive vehicles for grid support. J. Power Sources 2007, 168,
459–468. [CrossRef]
109. Pavi´c, I.; Capuder, T.; Kuzle, I. Value of ﬂexible electric vehicles in providing spinning reserve services.
Appl. Energy 2015, 157, 60–74. [CrossRef]
110. Izadkhast, S.D. Aggregation of Plug-in Electric Vehicles in Power Systems for Primary Frequency Control.
Delft Univ. Technol. Comillas Pontif. Univ. KTH R. Inst. 2017, 240. [CrossRef]
111. Yang, Z.; Li, K.; Foley, A.; Guo, Y. Computational scheduling methods for integrating plug-in electric vehicles
with power systems: A review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2015, 51, 396–416. [CrossRef]
112. Prabha, K. Power System Stability and Control; McGraw-Hill Education: New York, NY, USA, 1994; p. 1176.
113. Babahajiani, P.; Shaﬁee, Q.; Bevrani, H. Intelligent Demand Response Contribution in Frequency Control of
Multi-Area Power Systems. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2016, 9, 1282–1291. [CrossRef]
114. Ulbig, A.; Borsche, T.; Andersson, G. Impact of Low Rotational Inertia on Power System Stability and Operation;
Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2014; Volume 47, pp. 7290–7297.
115. Rodrigues, E.M.G.; Osório, G.; Godina, R.; Bizuayehu, A.; Lujano-Rojas, J.; Catalão, J. Grid code reinforcements
for deeper renewable generation in insular energy systems. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2016, 53, 163–177.
[CrossRef]
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
32 of 34
116. Cabrera-Tobar, A.; Bullich-Massagué, E.; Aragues-Penalba, M.; Gomis-Bellmunt, O. Review of advanced
grid requirements for the integration of large scale photovoltaic power plants in the transmission system.
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2016, 62, 971–987. [CrossRef]
117. Marinelli, M.; Martinenas, S.; Knezovi´c, K.; Andersen, P.B. Validating a centralized approach to primary
frequency control with series-produced electric vehicles. J. Energy Storage 2016, 7, 63–73. [CrossRef]
118. Mu, Y.; Wu, J.; Ekanayake, J.; Jenkins, N.; Jia, H. Primary Frequency Response From Electric Vehicles in the
Great Britain Power System. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2012, 4, 1142–1150. [CrossRef]
119. Wang, L.; Chen, B. Dual-level consensus-based frequency regulation using vehicle-to-grid service. Electr. Power
Syst. Res. 2019, 167, 261–276. [CrossRef]
120. Almeida, P.R.; Soares, F.J.; Lopes, J.P. Electric vehicles contribution for frequency control with inertial
emulation. Electr. Power Syst. Res. 2015, 127, 141–150. [CrossRef]
121. Meng, J.; Mu, Y.; Jia, H.; Wu, J.; Yu, X.; Qu, B. Dynamic frequency response from electric vehicles considering
travelling behavior in the Great Britain power system. Appl. Energy 2016, 162, 966–979. [CrossRef]
122. Jia, H.; Li, X.; Mu, Y.; Xu, C.; Jiang, Y.; Yu, X.; Wu, J.; Dong, C. Coordinated control for EV aggregators and
power plants in frequency regulation considering time-varying delays. Appl. Energy 2018, 210, 1363–1376.
[CrossRef]
123. Vahedipour-Dahraie, M.; Rashidizadeh-Kermani, H.; Ghamsari-Yazdel, M.; Khaloie, H.; Guerrero, J.M.
Coordination of EVs Participation for Load Frequency Control in Isolated Microgrids. Appl. Sci. 2017, 7, 539.
[CrossRef]
124. Debbarma, S.; Dutta, A. Utilizing Electric Vehicles for LFC in Restructured Power Systems Using Fractional
Order Controller. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2016, 8, 2554–2564. [CrossRef]
125. Hajforoosh, S.; Masoum, M.A.; Islam, S. Online optimal variable charge-rate coordination of plug-in electric
vehicles to maximize customer satisfaction and improve grid performance. Electr. Power Syst. Res. 2016, 141,
407–420. [CrossRef]
126. Nour, M.; Said, S.M.; Ramadan, H.; Ali, A.; Farkas, C. Control of Electric Vehicles Charging Without
Communication Infrastructure. In Proceedings of the 2018 Twentieth International Middle East Power
Systems Conference (MEPCON), Cairo, Egypt, 18–20 December 2018; pp. 773–778.
127. Ramadan, H.; Ali, A.; Nour, M.; Farkas, C. Smart Charging and Discharging of Plug-in Electric Vehicles
for Peak Shaving and Valley Filling of the Grid Power. In Proceedings of the 2018 Twentieth International
Middle East Power Systems Conference (MEPCON), Cairo, Egypt, 18–20 December 2018; pp. 735–739.
128. Marra, F.; Yang, G.Y.; Fawzy, Y.T.; Traeholt, C.; Larsen, E.; Garcia-Valle, R.; Jensen, M.M. Improvement
of Local Voltage in Feeders with Photovoltaic Using Electric Vehicles. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2013, 28,
3515–3516. [CrossRef]
129. Kisacikoglu, M.C.; Ozpineci, B.; Tolbert, L.M. Examination of a PHEV bidirectional charger system for
V2G reactive power compensation. In Proceedings of the 2010 Twenty-Fifth Annual IEEE Applied Power
Electronics Conference and Exposition (APEC) 2010, Palm Springs, CA, USA, 21–25 February 2010; pp. 458–465.
[CrossRef]
130. Yong, J.Y.; Ramachandaramurthy, V.K.; Tan, K.M.; Mithulananthan, N. Bi-directional electric vehicle fast
charging station with novel reactive power compensation for voltage regulation. Int. J. Electr. Power
Energy Syst. 2015, 64, 300–310. [CrossRef]
131. Azzouz, M.A.; Shaaban, M.F.; El-Saadany, E.F. Real-Time Optimal Voltage Regulation for Distribution
Networks Incorporating High Penetration of PEVs. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2015, 30, 1–12. [CrossRef]
132. Nour, M.; Ali, A.; Farkas, C. Evaluation of Electric Vehicles Charging Impacts on A Real Low Voltage Grid.
Int. J. Power Eng. Energy 2018, 1–6.
133. Zhang, K.; Xu, L.; Ouyang, M.; Wang, H.; Lu, L.; Li, J.; Li, Z. Optimal decentralized valley-ﬁlling charging
strategy for electric vehicles. Energy Convers. Manag. 2014, 78, 537–550. [CrossRef]
134. Su, J.; Lie, T.; Zamora, R. Modelling of large-scale electric vehicles charging demand: A New Zealand case
study. Electr. Power Syst. Res. 2019, 167, 171–182. [CrossRef]
135. Staudt, P.; Schmidt, M.; Gärttner, J.; Weinhardt, C. A decentralized approach towards resolving transmission
grid congestion in Germany using vehicle-to-grid technology. Appl. Energy 2018, 230, 1435–1446. [CrossRef]
136. Wang, Z. Grid Power Peak Shaving and Valley Filling Using Vehicle-to-Grid Systems. IEEE Trans. Power Deliv.
2013, 28, 1822–1829. [CrossRef]
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
33 of 34
137. Colmenar-Santos, A.; Linares-Mena, A.-R.; Borge-Diez, D.; Quinto-Alemany, C.-D. Impact assessment of
electric vehicles on islands grids: A case study for Tenerife (Spain). Energy 2017, 120, 385–396. [CrossRef]
138. Dagdougui, H.; Ouammi, A.; Dessaint, L.A. Peak Load Reduction in a Smart Building Integrating Microgrid
and V2B-Based Demand Response Scheme. IEEE Syst. J. 2019, 13, 3274–3282. [CrossRef]
139. Martinenas, S.; Knezovi´c, K.; Marinelli, M. Management of Power Quality Issues in Low Voltage Networks
using Electric Vehicles: Experimental Validation. IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 2016, 32, 1. [CrossRef]
140. Akhavan-Rezai, E.; Shaaban, M.F.; El-Saadany, E.F.; Karray, F. Managing Demand for Plug-in Electric Vehicles
in Unbalanced LV Systems with Photovoltaics. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2017, 13, 1057–1067. [CrossRef]
141. Farahani, H.F. Improving voltage unbalance of low-voltage distribution networks using plug-in electric
vehicles. J. Clean. Prod. 2017, 148, 336–346. [CrossRef]
142. Jiménez, A.; García, N. Voltage unbalance analysis of distribution systems using a three-phase power ﬂow
ans a Genetic Algorithm for PEV ﬂeets scheduling. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE Power Energy Society
General Meeting 2012, San Diego, CA, USA, 22–26 July 2012; pp. 1–8. [CrossRef]
143. Jabalameli, N.; Su, X.; Ghosh, A. Online Centralized Charging Coordination of PEVs With Decentralized
Var Discharging for Mitigation of Voltage Unbalance. IEEE Power Energy Technol. Syst. J. 2019, 6, 152–161.
[CrossRef]
144. Gallardo-Lozano, J.; Milanés-Montero, M.I.; Guerrero-Martínez, M.A.; Romero-Cadaval, E. Electric vehicle
battery charger for smart grids. Electr. Power Syst. Res. 2012, 90, 18–29. [CrossRef]
145. Rauchfuss, L.; Foulquier, J.; Werner, R. Charging station as an active ﬁlter for harmonics compensation
of smart grid. In Proceedings of the 2014 16th International Conference on Harmonics and Quality of
Power (ICHQP), Bucharest, Romania, 5–28 May 2014; Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE);
pp. 181–184.
146. Ali, A.; Raisz, D.; Mahmoud, K. Voltage ﬂuctuation smoothing in distribution systems with RES considering
degradation and charging plan of EV batteries. Electr. Power Syst. Res. 2019, 176, 105933. [CrossRef]
147. García-Villalobos, J.; Zamora, I.; Knezovi´c, K.; Marinelli, M. Multi-objective optimization control of plug-in
electric vehicles in low voltage distribution networks. Appl. Energy 2016, 180, 155–168. [CrossRef]
148. Brinkel, N.B.G.; Gerritsma, M.K.; AlSkaif, T.A.; Lampropoulos, I.; van Voorden, A.M.; Fidder, H.A.;
van Sark, W.G.J.H.M. Impact of rapid PV ﬂuctuations on power quality in the low-voltage grid and mitigation
strategies using electric vehicles. Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst. 2020, 118, 105741. [CrossRef]
149. Magdy, G.; Nour, M.; Shabib, G.; Elbaset, A.A.; Mitani, Y. Supplementary Frequency Control in a
High-penetration Real Power System by Renewables Using SMES Application. J. Electr. Syst.
2019,
15, 526–538.
150. Liu, L.; Kong, F.; Liu, X.; Peng, Y.; Wang, Q. A review on electric vehicles interacting with renewable energy
in smart grid. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2015, 51, 648–661. [CrossRef]
151. Teng, F.; Aunedi, M.; Strbac, G. Beneﬁts of ﬂexibility from smart electriﬁed transportation and heating in the
future UK electricity system. Appl. Energy 2016, 167, 420–431. [CrossRef]
152. Dallinger, D.; Wietschel, M. Grid integration of intermittent renewable energy sources using price-responsive
plug-in electric vehicles. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2012, 16, 3370–3382. [CrossRef]
153. Dallinger, D.; Gerda, S.; Wietschel, M. Integration of intermittent renewable power supply using
grid-connected vehicles—A 2030 case study for California and Germany. Appl. Energy 2013, 104, 666–682.
[CrossRef]
154. Lund, H.; Kempton, W. Integration of renewable energy into the transport and electricity sectors through
V2G. Energy Policy 2008, 36, 3578–3587. [CrossRef]
155. Li, Y.; Li, K. Incorporating Demand Response of Electric Vehicles in Scheduling of Isolated Microgrids With
Renewables Using a Bi-Level Programming Approach. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 116256–116266. [CrossRef]
156. Carrión, M.; Zárate-Miñano, R. Operation of renewable-dominated power systems with a signiﬁcant
penetration of plug-in electric vehicles. Energy 2015, 90, 827–835. [CrossRef]
157. Saber, A.Y.; Venayagamoorthy, G.K.; Member, S. Plug-in Vehicles and Renewable Energy Sources for Cost
and Emission Reductions Plug-in Vehicles and Renewable Energy Sources for Cost and Emission Reductions.
IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 2016, 58, 1229–1238. [CrossRef]
158. Kordkheili, R.A.; Pourmousavi, S.A.; Savaghebi, M.; Guerrero, J.M.; Nehrir, M.H. Assessing the Potential of
Plug-in Electric Vehicles in Active Distribution Networks. Energies 2016, 9, 34. [CrossRef]
Energies 2020, 13, 4675
34 of 34
159. Ahmadian, A.; Sedghi, M.; Mohammadi-Ivatloo, B.; Elkamel, A.; Golkar, M.A.; Fowler, M. Cost-Beneﬁt
Analysis of V2G Implementation in Distribution Networks Considering PEVs Battery Degradation. IEEE Trans.
Sustain. Energy 2017, 9, 961–970. [CrossRef]
160. Arias, N.B.; Hashemi, S.; Andersen, P.B.; Traeholt, C.; Romero, R. Distribution System Services Provided by
Electric Vehicles: Recent Status, Challenges, and Future Prospects. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2019, 20,
4277–4296. [CrossRef]
161. Zecchino, A.; Knezovi´c, K.; Marinelli, M. Identification of conflicts between transmission and distribution system
operators when acquiring ancillary services from electric vehicles. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE PES Innovative
Smart Grid Technologies Conference Europe (ISGT-Europe), Torino, Italy, 26–29 September 2017.
162. Gerard, H.; Puente, E.I.R.; Six, D. Coordination between transmission and distribution system operators in
the electricity sector: A conceptual framework. Util. Policy 2018, 50, 40–48. [CrossRef]
163. Zeb, M.Z.; Imran, K.; Khattak, A.; Janjua, A.K.; Pal, A.; Nadeem, M.; Zhang, J.; Khan, S. Optimal Placement
of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in the Active Distribution Network. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 68124–68134.
[CrossRef]
164. Zhang, H.; Moura, S.J.; Hu, Z.; Song, Y. PEV Fast-Charging Station Siting and Sizing on Coupled Transportation
and Power Networks. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2018, 9, 2595–2605. [CrossRef]
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
